The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Lay of Havelok the Dane, by Unknown

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Lay of Havelok the Dane

Author: Unknown

Editor: Frederic Madden
        Walter William Skeat

Release Date: April 19, 2010 [EBook #32049]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE LAY OF HAVELOK THE DANE ***




Produced by Louise Hope, Taavi Kalju and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
book was produced from scanned images of public domain
material from the Google Print project.)






[This e-text includes characters that require UTF-8 (Unicode) file
encoding:

  œ : “oe” ligature
  Ȝȝ, ƿ, ſ, ǽ : yogh, wynn, long s, accented æ (only in notes)

These characters, as well as a single Greek phrase, occur only in the
notes, not in the poem itself. If any of the characters do not display
properly, or if the apostrophes and quotation marks in this paragraph
appear as garbage, make sure your text reader’s “character set” or
“file encoding” is set to Unicode (UTF-8). You may also need to change
the default font. As a last resort, use the Latin-1 version of the
file instead.

The original book (EETS E.S. 4, 1868, ed. Skeat) exists in at least two
forms. See Errata section at the end of the e-text for details.

In the main text, footnotes are grouped at the end of text sections.
Most headnotes have similarly been moved to the nearest break in the
text. Sidenotes keep their original starting point, but are collected
into full sentences.

_Typography:_

Large initial capitals are shown with a single leading + to avoid
“breaking” the text:

  +Herknet to me, gode men
  Wiues, maydnes, and alle men ...

Italicized letters representing expanded contractions are shown in
br{ac}es. All other italics are shown conventionally with _lines_; this
includes italicized _w_, used by the editor for wynn ƿ. If you find the
braces distracting you may delete them globally; they are not used for
any other purpose.

A few French passages in the Preface use a trailing tilde ~, as in the
word “q~”. In the original, the ~ was attached to the preceding letter,
but not directly above it. Superscript letters are shown with a caret ^.

Square brackets are in the original except those in standard formulas
such as [Footnote] or [Transcriber’s Note].]




  THE LAY OF
  HAVELOK THE DANE.


  Early English Text Society.
  Extra Series. No. IV.
  1868.




  Dublin:        William McGee, 18, Nassau Street.
  Edinburgh:     T. G. Stevenson, 22, South Frederick Street.
  Glasgow:       Ogle & Co., 1, Royal Exchange Square.
  Berlin:        Asher & Co., Unter den Linden, 20.
  New York:      C. Scribner & Co.; Leypoldt & Holt.
  Philadelphia:  J. B. Lippincott & Co.
  Boston, U.S.:  Dutton & Co.




  +The Lay of+

  +HAVELOK THE DANE:+


  Composed in the Reign of Edward I, about A.D. 1280.

  Formerly Edited by Sir F. Madden for the Roxburghe Club,

  And now Re-Edited from the Unique Ms. Laud Misc. 108,
  in the Bodleian Library, Oxford;

  by the

  REV. WALTER W. SKEAT, M.A.,

  Author of “A Mœso-Gothic Glossary,” Editor of “Piers Plowman,”
  “William of Palerne,” &c.


[Illustration: Seal of Great Grimsby]


  LONDON:
  Published For The Early English Text Society,
  By N. Trübner & Co., 60, Paternoster Row.

  MDCCCLXVIII.




  +Extra Series,+
  IV.

  John Childs and Son, Printers.




CONTENTS.


  TITLEPAGE. The engraving represents the seal of Great Grimsby,
    described in § 19 of the Preface, p. xxi.

  PREFACE. § 1. The former edition of 1828. § 2. The present
    edition. § 3. Plan of this edition. § 4. Notices of the story by
    Early Writers: the longer French Version. § 5. The shorter
    French Version. § 6. Peter de Langtoft (1307). § 7. Rauf de Boun
    (1310). § 8. A Brief Genealogy, Herald’s Coll. MS. (ab. 1310).
    § 9. Metrical Chronicle (ab. 1313). § 10. Robert of Brunne
    (1338); ed. Hearne. § 11. Robert of Brunne; Lambeth MS.
    § 12. French Prose “Brute” (1332). § 13. English Prose “Brute,”
    MS. Harl. 2279. § 14. Gray’s Scala Cronica (ab. 1360).
    § 15. Eulogium Historiarum (1366). § 16. Henry de Knyghton
    (1395); Warner (1586); Webster (1617). § 17. Danish traditions.
    § 18. Lincolnshire traditions. § 19. Seal of Great Grimsby.
    § 20. Sketch of the French “Lai.” § 21. Gaimar’s abridgment.
    § 22. Sketch of the English Lay. § 23. Possible date of
    Havelok’s reign. § 24. Story of “Edwin of Deira.” § 25. On the
    names “Curan” and “Havelok.” § 26. Description of the MS.
    § 27. Grammatical forms in the Poem. § 28. On the metre.
    § 29. On the final _-e_, &c.                                   i

  EMENDATIONS, &c.                                               liv

  THE LAY OF HAVELOK                                               1

  NOTES TO “HAVELOK”                                              87

  GLOSSARIAL INDEX                                               105

  INDEX OF NAMES                                                 157




  [Headnotes:
  _The full set has been duplicated here to act as a supplementary
  table of contents. Headnotes separated by / were continued across
  facing pages._

  THE GOOD KING ATHELWOLD /
    IS KING OVER ALL ENGLAND.
  ATHELWOLD IS ABOUT TO DIE.
  HE SUMMONS HIS LORDS TO WINCHESTER.
  ATHELWOLD SELECTS EARL GODRICH /
    TO BE HIS DAUGHTER’S GUARDIAN.
  KING ATHELWOLD DIES.
  EARL GODRICH TAKES POSSESSION.
  GODRICH PLOTS AGAINST HIS WARD.
  BIRKABEYN IS KING OF DENMARK.
  BIRKABEYN SELECTS EARL GODARD /
    TO BE GUARDIAN OF HIS THREE CHILDREN.
  GODARD IMPRISONS THE THREE CHILDREN.
  GODARD KILLS SWANBORGUGH AND HELFLED.
  GODARD SPARES HAVELOK FOR A TIME.
  GODARD TELLS GRIM TO DROWN HAVELOK.
  HAVELOK IS TAKEN TO GRIM’S COTTAGE.
  GRIM SEES THAT HAVELOK IS THE KING’S SON.
  GRIM AND HIS WIFE FEED HAVELOK.
  GRIM SAYS HE HAS DROWNED HAVELOK.
  GRIM SETS SAIL FOR ENGLAND.
  GRIM FOUNDS THE TOWN OF GRIMSBY.
  HAVELOK DOES NOT LIKE BEING IDLE.
  HAVELOK SELLS FISH LIKE THE BEST.
  HAVELOK GOES TO LINCOLN TO GET WORK.
  HE HELPS THE EARL OF CORNWALL’S COOK.
  HAVELOK IS HIRED BY THE EARL’S COOK.
  HE CUTS WOOD, AND DRAWS WATER.
  HAVELOK GROWS VERY TALL AND STRONG.
  HE SEES SOME MEN “PUTTING THE STONE.”
  HE “PUTS THE STONE” FURTHER THAN ANY.
  GODRICH HEARS OF HAVELOK’S STRENGTH.
  GOLDBOROUGH IS SENT FOR TO LINCOLN.
  GODRICH ASKS HAVELOK IF HE WILL MARRY.
  HAVELOK RESOLVES TO GO TO GRIMSBY.
  GRIM’S CHILDREN WELCOME HAVELOK.
  GOLDBOROUGH SEES THE WONDROUS LIGHT.
  HAVELOK TELLS HER HIS STRANGE DREAM.
  SHE SAYS HAVELOK WILL BE A GREAT KING.
  HAVELOK PRAYS FOR VENGEANCE ON GODARD.
  HAVELOK ADDRESSES GRIM’S THREE SONS.
  HE ASKS THEM TO GO WITH HIM TO DENMARK.
  HAVELOK GIVES UBBE A GOLD RING.
  UBBE INVITES HAVELOK TO A FEAST.
  UBBE TAKES A GREAT FANCY TO HAVELOK.
  UBBE SENDS HAVELOK TO BERNARD.
  A GANG OF THIEVES BESET BERNARD’S HOUSE.
  THREE OF THE THIEVES ATTACK HAVELOK.
  HAVELOK SLAYS SEVEN OF THE THIEVES.
  THE THIEVES SHOOT AT HIM FROM A DISTANCE.
  HUGH AND THE REST COME TO THE RESCUE.
  ALL THE SIXTY THIEVES ARE SLAIN.
  UBBE ASKS BERNARD WHAT HAS HAPPENED.
  BERNARD RELATES HAVELOK’S PROWESS.
  THE OTHERS CONFIRM BERNARD’S STORY.
  UBBE SENDS FOR HAVELOK AND TAKES HIM TO HIS CASTLE.
  UBBE SEES THE MIRACULOUS LIGHT /
    WHICH ISSUES FROM HAVELOK’S MOUTH.
  THE LIGHT SHOWS THAT HAVELOK IS THE HEIR.
  UBBE SAYS HAVELOK SHALL BE KING.
  UBBE RELATES HAVELOK’S HISTORY.
  UBBE DOES HOMAGE TO HAVELOK.
  ALL SWEAR TO BE FAITHFUL TO HAVELOK.
  UBBE DUBS HAVELOK A KNIGHT.
  HAVELOK IS MADE KING OF DENMARK.
  HAVELOK GOES TO SEEK OUT GODARD.
  GODARD’S MEN ARE BEATEN.
  GODARD IS BOUND AND LED TO HAVELOK.
  HE IS CONDEMNED TO BE HUNG.
  GODARD IS FLAYED ALIVE AND HUNG.
  GODRICH RAISES AN ARMY AGAINST HAVELOK.
  GODRICH EXCITES THE ENGLISH AGAINST HAVELOK.
  THE ENGLISH MARCH TO GRIMSBY.
  COMBAT BETWEEN UBBE AND GODRICH.
  GODRICH DISPLAYS GREAT PROWESS.
  COMBAT BETWEEN GODRICH AND HAVELOK.
  GODRICH IS BOUND AND FETTERED.
  THE ENGLISH SUBMIT TO GOLDBOROUGH.
  GODRICH IS CONDEMNED TO BE BURNT.
  THE EARL OF CHESTER MARRIES GUNILD.
  HAVELOK REMEMBERS BERTRAM’S KINDNESS.
  BERTRAM MARRIES GRIM’S SECOND DAUGHTER.
  HAVELOK IS CROWNED KING OF ENGLAND.
  SUCH IS THE “GESTE” OF HAVELOK.
  SAY A PATERNOSTER FOR THE AUTHOR.]




PREFACE.


§ 1. The English version of the Lay of Havelok, now here reprinted, is
one of the few poems that have happily been recovered, after having long
been given up as lost. Tyrwhitt, in his Essay on the Language and
Versification of Chaucer, has a footnote (No. 51) deploring the loss of
the Rime concerning Gryme the Fisher, the founder of Grymesby, Hanelok
[_read_ Havelok] the Dane, and his wife Goldborough; and Ritson, in his
Dissertation on Romance and Minstrelsy--(vol. i. p. lxxxviii. of his
Metrical Romanceës)--makes remarks to the same effect. It was at length,
however, discovered by accident in a manuscript belonging to the
Bodleian library, which had been described in the old Catalogue merely
as _Vitæ Sanctorum_, a large portion of it being occupied by metrical
legends of the Saints. In 1828, it was edited for the Roxburghe Club by
Sir F. Madden, the title-page of the edition being as follows:-- “The
Ancient English Romance of Havelok the Dane, accompanied by the French
Text: with an introduction, notes, and a glossary, by Frederick Madden,
Esq., F.A.S. F.R.S.L., Sub-Keeper of the MSS. in the British Museum.
Printed for the Roxburghe Club, London. W. Nicol, Shakspeare Press,
MDCCCXXVIII.” This volume contains a very complete Introduction,
pp. i-lvi; the English version of Havelok, pp. 1-104; the French text of
the Romance of Havelok, from a MS. in the Heralds’ College, pp. 105-146;
the French Romance of Havelok, as abridged and altered by Geffrei
Gaimar, pp. 147-180; notes to the English text, pp. 181-207; notes to
the French text, pp. 208-210; and a glossary, &c., pp. 211-263. But
there are sometimes bound up with it two pamphlets, viz. “Remarks on the
Glossary to Havelok,” by S. W. Singer, and an “Examination of the
Remarks, &c.,” by the Editor of Havelok. In explanation of this, it may
suffice to say, that the former contains some criticisms by Mr Singer
(executed in a manner suggestive of an officious wish to display
superior critical acumen), of which a few are correct, but others are
ludicrously false; whilst the latter is a vindication of the general
correctness of the explanations given, and contains, incidentally, some
valuable contributions to our general etymological knowledge, and
various remarks which have proved of service in rendering the glossary
in the present edition more exactly accurate.[1]

    [Footnote 1: In particular, we find there a complete proof,
    supported by some fifty examples, that, _as_ can be traced,
    through the forms _ase_, _als_, _alse_, _also_, to the A.S.
    _eall-swa_; a proof, that in the difficult phrase _lond and
    lithe_, the word _lithe_ [also spelt _lede_, _lude_] is equivalent
    to the French _tenement_, _rente_, or _fe_; and, thirdly, a
    complete refutation of Mr Singer’s extraordinary notion that the
    adverb _swithe_ means _a sword_!]


§ 2. Owing to the scarcity of copies of this former edition, the
committee of the Early English Text Society, having first obtained the
approval of Sir Frederic Madden, resolved upon issuing a reprint of it;
and Sir Frederic having expressed a wish that the duty of seeing it
through the press should be entrusted to myself, I gladly undertook that
responsibility. He has kindly looked over the revises of the whole
work,[2] but as it has undergone several modifications, it will be the
best plan to state in detail what these are.

    [Footnote 2: In the same way, _William of Palerne_ was prepared
    by me for the press, subject to his advice; see _William of
    Palerne_, Introduction, p. ii.]


§ 3. With respect to the text, the greatest care has been taken to
render it, as nearly as can be represented in print, an exact copy of
the MS. The text of the former edition is exceedingly correct, and the
alterations here made are few and of slight importance. Sir F. Madden
furnished me with some, the results of a re-comparison, made by himself,
of his printed copy with the original; besides this, I have myself
carefully read the proof sheets with the MS. _twice_, and it may
therefore be assumed that the complete correctness of the text is
established. It seems to me that this is altogether the most important
part of the work of a _Text_ Society, in order that the student may
never be perplexed by the appearance of words having no real existence.
For a like reason the letters þ and ƿ (the latter of which I have
represented by an italic _w_) have now been inserted wherever they
occur, and the expansions of abbreviations are now denoted by italics.
For further remarks upon the text, see the description of the MS. below,
§ 26. Sidenotes and headlines have been added, but the numbering of the
lines has not been altered. The French text of the romance, the title of
which is _Le Lai de Aveloc_, and the abridgment of the story by Geffrei
Gaimar, have not been here reprinted; the fact being, that the French
and English versions differ very widely, and that the passages of the
French which really correspond to the English are few and short. _All_
of these will be found in the Notes, in their proper places, and it was
also deemed the less necessary to print the French text, because it is
tolerably accessible; for it may be found either in vol. i. of Monumenta
Historica Britannica, ed. Petrie, 1848, in the reprint by M. Michel
(1833) entitled “Le Lai d’Havelok,” or in the edition by Mr T. Wright
for the Caxton Society, 1850. An abstract of it is given at p. xxiii.
The Notes are abridged from Sir F. Madden’s, with but a very few
additions by myself, which are distinguished by being placed within
square brackets. The Glossarial Index is, for the most part, reprinted
from Sir F. Madden’s Glossary, but contains a large number of _slight_
alterations, re-arrangements, and additions. The references have nearly
all been verified,[3] and the few words formerly left unexplained are
now either wholly or partially solved. I have now only to add that a
large portion of the remainder of this preface, especially that which
concerns the historical and traditional evidences of the story (§ 4 to
§ 18), is abridged or copied from Sir F. Madden’s long Introduction,
which fairly exhausts the subject.[4] All extracts included between
marks of quotation are taken from it without alteration. But I must be
considered responsible for the rearrangement of the materials, and I
have added a few remarks from other sources.

    [Footnote 3: I say _nearly_, because I have not been able to
    verify _every_ reference to _every_ poem quoted. I have verified
    and critically examined all the citations from the _poem itself_,
    from Ritson’s Romances, Weber’s Romances, Laȝamon, Beowulf,
    Chaucer, Langland, and Sir Walter Scott’s edition of Sir Tristrem
    (3rd edition, 1811).]

    [Footnote 4: To this, the reader is referred for fuller
    information.]


§ 4. NOTICES OF THE STORY OF HAVELOK BY EARLY WRITERS. There can be
little doubt that the tradition must have existed from Anglo-Saxon
times, but the earliest mention of it is presented to us in the full
account furnished by the French version of the Romance. Of this there
are two copies, one of which belongs to Sir T. Phillipps; the other is
known as the Arundel or Norfolk MS., and is preserved in the Heralds’
College, where it is marked E. D. N. No. 14; the various editions of the
latter have been already enumerated in § 3. This version was certainly
composed within the first half of the twelfth century. From the fact
that it is entitled a _Lai_, and from the assertion of the poet--“Qe vn
_lai_ en firent li Breton”--“whereof the Britons made a lay”--we easily
conclude that it was drawn from a British source. From the evident
connection of the story with the Chronicle called the _Brut_, we may
further conclude that by _Breton_ is not meant Armorican, but belonging
to _Britain_. The story is in no way connected with France; the
tradition is British or Welsh, and the French version was doubtless
written in England by a subject of an English king. That the language is
French is due merely to the accident that the Norman conquerors of
England had acquired that language during their temporary sojourn in
France. From every point of view, whether we regard the British
tradition, the Anglo-Norman version, or the version printed in the
present volume, the story is wholly English. It is not to be connected
too closely with the Armorican lays of Marie _de France_.[5]

    [Footnote 5: “The word Breton, which some critics refer to
    Armorica, is here applied to a story of mere English birth.”
    Hallam; Lit. of Europe, 6th ed. 1860; vol. i. p. 36. See the whole
    passage.]


§ 5. We next come to the abridgment of the same as made by Geffrei
Gaimar, who wrote between the years 1141 and 1151. In one place, Geffrei
quotes Gildas as his authority, but no conclusion can easily be drawn
from this indefinite reference. In another place, he mentions a feast
given by Havelok after his defeat of Hodulf-- _si cum nus dit la verai
estoire_-- “as the true history tells us.” As this feast is not
mentioned in the fuller French version, and yet reappears in the English
text, we perceive that he had some additional source of information; and
this is confirmed by the fact that he mentions several additional
details, also not found in the completer version. That the lay of
Havelok, as found in Gaimar, is really his, and not an interpolation by
a later hand, may fairly be inferred from his repeated allusions to the
story in the body of his work. There are three MS. copies containing
Gaimar’s abridgment, of which the best is the Royal MS. (Bibl. Reg. 13
A. xxi.) in the British Museum; the two others belong respectively to
the Dean and Chapter of Durham (its mark being C. iv. 27) and to the
Dean and Chapter of Lincoln (its mark being H. 18). It is curious that
the Norfolk MS. contains not only the fuller French version of the
story, but also the Brut of Wace, and the continuation of it by Gaimar.
Gaimar’s abridgment, as printed in Sir F. Madden’s edition, is taken
from the Royal MS., supplemented by the Durham and Lincoln MSS. See also
Monumenta Historica Britannica, vol. i. p. 764. It is important to
mention that Gaimar speaks of the Danes as having been in Norfolk since
the time that Havelok was King, after he has been relating the combats
between the Britons and the Saxons under the command of Cerdic and
Cynric. Another allusion makes Havelok to have lived long before the
year 800, according to every system of chronology.


§ 6. The next mention of Havelok is in the French Chronicle of Peter de
Langtoft, of Langtoft in Yorkshire, who died early in the reign of
Edward II., and whose Chronicle closes with the death of Edward I. Here
the only trace of the story is in the mention of “Gountere le pere
Hauelok, de Danays Ray clamez”--Gunter, father of Havelok, called King
of the Danes. The allusion is almost valueless from its evident
absurdity; for he confounds Gunter with the Danish invader defeated by
Alfred, and who is variously called Godrum, Gudrum, Guthrum, or
Gurmound. He must have been thinking, at the moment, of a very different
Gurmund, viz. the King of the Africans, as he is curiously called, whose
terrible devastations are described very fully in Laȝamon, vol. iii.
pp. 156-177, and who may fairly be supposed to have lived much nearer to
the time of Havelok; and he must further have confounded this Gurmund
with Gunter. For the account of Robert of Brunne’s translation of
Langtoft’s Chronicle, see below, § 10.


§ 7. But soon after this, we come to a most curious account. In MS.
Harl. 902 is a late copy, on paper, of a Chronicle called _Le Bruit
Dengleterre_, or otherwise _Le Petit Bruit_, compiled A.D. 1310, by
Meistre Rauf de Boun, at the request of Henry de Lacy, earl of Lincoln.
It is a most worthless compilation, put together in defiance of all
chronology, but with respect to our present inquiry it is full of
interest, as it soon becomes obvious that one of his sources of
information is the very English version here printed, which he cites by
the name of _l’estorie de Grimesby_, and which is thus proved to have
been written before the year 1310. “The Chronicler,” says Sir F. Madden,
“commences, as usual, with Brute, B.C. 2000, and after taking us through
the succeeding reigns to the time of Cassibelin, who fought with Julius
Cæsar, informs us, that after Cassibelin’s death came Gurmound out of
Denmark, who claimed the throne as the son of the eldest daughter of
Belin, married to Thorand, King of Denmark. He occupies the kingdom 57
years, and is at length slain at _Hunteton_, called afterwards from him
_Gurmoundcestre_. He is succeeded by his son Frederick, who hated the
English, and filled his court with Danish nobles, but who is at last
driven out of the country, after having held it for the short space of
71 years. And then, adds this miserable History-monger: ‘Et si entendrez
vous, que par cel primer venue de auaunt dit Roy Gormound, et puis par
cele hountoux exil de son fitz Frederik, si fu le rancour de Daneis vers
nous enpendaunt, et le regne par cel primere accion vers nous
enchalangount plus de sept C auns apre, _iekis a la venue Haneloke, fitz
le Roy Birkenebayne de Dannemarche, q~ le regne par mariage entra de sa
femme_.’ --f. 2 b.

“After a variety of equally credible stories, we come to Adelstan II.[6]
son of Edward [the Elder], who corresponds with the real king of that
name, A.D. 925-941. He is succeeded by his son [brother] Edmund, who
reigned four years [A.D. 941-946], and is said to have been _poisoned_
at Canterbury; after whom we have ADELWOLD, whose identity with the
Athelwold of the English Romance, will leave no doubt as to the source
whence the writer drew great part of his materials in the following
passage:

  ‘Apres ceo vient Adelwold son fitz q~ reigna XVJ et demie, si
  engendroit ij feiz et iij filis, dount trestoutz murrirent
  frechement fors q~ sa pune file, le out a nom _Goldburgh_, del age
  de VJ aunz kaunt son pere Adelwold morust. Cely Roy Adelwold quant
  il doit morir, comaunda sa file a garder a vn Count de Cornewayle,
  al houre kaunt il quidou~ie (sic) hountousment auoir deparagé,
  quaunt fit _Haueloke_, fitz le Roy Byrkenbayne de Denmarche, esposer
  le, encountre sa volunté, q~ primis fuit Roy Dengleterre et de
  Denmarch tout a vn foitz, par quele aliaunce leis Daneis queillerunt
  g^{e}ndr~ (sic) mestrie en Engleterre, et long temps puise le
  tindrunt, _si cum vous nouncie l’estorie de Grimesby_, come _Grime_
  primez nurist Haueloke en Engleterre, depuis cel houre q’il feut
  chasé de Denmarche &c. deqis al houre q’il vint au chastelle de
  Nichole, q~ cely auauntdit traitre _Goudriche_ out en garde, en quel
  chastel il auauntdit Haueloke espousa l’auauntdit Goldeburgh, q~
  fuit heir Dengleterre. Et par cel reson tynt cely Haueloke la terre
  de Denmarche auxi comme son heritage, et Engleterre auxi par mariage
  de sa femme; et si entendrez vous, q~ par la reson q~ ly auauntdit
  Gryme ariua primez, kaunt il amena l’enfaunt Haueloke hors de
  Denmarche, par meyme la reson reseut cele vile son nom, de Grime,
  quel noun ly tint vnquore Grimisby.

  ‘Apres ceo regna meyme cely Haueloke, q~ mult fuit prodhomme, et
  droiturelle, et bien demenoit son people en reson et ley. Cel Roy
  Haueloke reigna xlj. aunz, si engendroit ix fitz et vij filis, dount
  trestoutz murrerount ainz q~ furunt d’age, fors soulement iiij de
  ses feitz, dont l’un out a noum Gurmound, cely q~ entendy auoir son
  heire en Engleterre; le secound out a noun Knout, quen fitz feffoit
  son pere en le regne de Denmarche, quant il estoit del age de xviij
  aunz, et ly mesme se tynt a la coroune Dengleterre, quel terre il
  entendy al oeps son ainez fitz Gurmound auoir gardé. Mes il debusa
  son col auxi comme il feu mounté vn cheval testous q~ poindre
  volleyt, en l’an de son regne xxiij entrant. Le tiers fitz ont a
  noun Godard, q~ son pere feffoit de la Seneschacie Dengleterre, q~
  n’auo~ut (sic) taunt come ore fait ly quart. Et le puisnez fitz de
  toutz out a noum Thorand, q~ espousa la Countesse de Hertouwe en
  Norwey. Et par la reson q~ cely Thorand feut enherité en la terre de
  Norwey, ly et ses successours sont enheritez iekis en sa p~ce (sic)
  toutdis, puis y auoit affinité de alliaunce entre ceulx de Denmarche
  et ceulx de Norwey, a checun venue q~ vnkes firent en ceste terre
  pur chalenge ou clayme mettre, iekis a taunt q~ lour accion feut
  enseyne destrut par vn noble chevallere _Guy de Warwike_, &c. Et
  tout en sy feffoit Haueloke sez quatre fitz: si gist a priorie de
  _Grescherche_ en Loundrez.’ --f. 6 b.

“The _Estorie de Grimesby_ therefore, referred to above, is the
identical English Romance before us, and it is no less worthy of remark,
that the whole of the passage just quoted, with one single variation of
import, has been literally translated by Henry de Knyghton, and inserted
in his Chronicle.[7] Of the sources whence the information respecting
Havelok’s sons is derived, we are unable to offer any account, as no
trace of it occurs either in the French or English texts of the story.”

    [Footnote 6: “The Chronicler writes of him, f. 6. ‘Il feu le
    plus beau bacheleir q{e} vnqes reigna en Engleterre, _ceo dit le
    Bruit_, par quoy ly lays ly apellerunt _King Adelstane with gilden
    kroket_, pour ce q’il feu si beaus.’ We have here notice of
    another of those curious historical poems, the loss of which can
    never be sufficiently deplored. The term _crocket_ (derived by
    Skinner from the Fr. _crochet_, uncinulus) points out the period
    of the poem’s composition, since the fashion alluded to of wearing
    those large rolls of hair so called, only arose at the latter end
    of Hen. III. reign, and continued through the reign of Edw. I. and
    part of his successor’s.”]

    [Footnote 7: See below, § 16.]


§ 8. “About the same time at which Rauf de Boun composed his Chronicle,
was written a brief Genealogy of the British and Saxon Kings, from
Brutus to Edward II., preserved in the same MS. in the Heralds’ College
which contains the French text of the Romance. The following curious
rubric is prefixed:-- _La lignée des Bretons et des Engleis, queus il
furent, et de queus nons, et coment Brut vint premerement en Engleterre,
et combien de tens puis, et dont il vint. Brut et Cornelius furent
chevalers chacez de la bataille de Troie, M. CCCC. XVII. anz deuant qe
dieus nasquit, et vindrent en Engleterre, en Cornewaille, et riens ne
fut trouee en la terre fors qe geanz, Geomagog, Hastripoldius,
Ruscalbundy, et plusurs autres Geanz._ In this Genealogy no mention of
Havelok occurs under the reign of Constantine, but after the names of
the Saxon Kings Edbright and Edelwin, we read: ‘ATHELWOLD auoit vne
fille _Goldeburgh_, et il regna vi. anz. HAUELOC esposa meisme cele
Goldeburgh, et regna iij. anz. ALFRED le frere le Roi Athelwold enchaca
Haueloc par Hunehere, et il fut le primer Roi corone de l’apostoille, et
il regna xxx. anz.’ --fol. 148 b. By this account Athelwold is clearly
identified with Ethelbald, King of Wessex, who reigned from 855 to 860,
whilst Havelok is substituted in the place of Ethelbert and Ethered.”


§ 9. “Not long after the same period was written a Metrical _Chronicle
of England_, printed by Ritson, Metr. Rom. V. ii. p. 270. Two copies are
known to exist,[8] the first concluding with the death of Piers
Gavestone, in 1313 (MS. Reg. 12. C. xii.), and the other continued to
the time of Edw. III. (Auchinleck MS.). The period of Havelok’s descent
into England is there ascribed to the reign of King Ethelred (978-1016),
which will very nearly coincide with the period assigned by Rauf de
Boun, viz. A.D. 963-1004.”

 ‘_Haueloc_ com tho to this lond,
  With gret host & eke strong,
  Ant sloh the Kyng Achelred,
  At Westmustre he was ded,
  Ah he heuede reigned her
  Seuene an tuenti fulle ȝer.’

    MS. Reg. 12. C. xii.

“This date differs from most of the others, and appears founded on the
general notion of the Danish invasions during that period.”

    [Footnote 8: The poems in MSS. Camb. Univ. Lib. Ff. 5. 48 and
    Dd. 14. 2 resemble this Chronicle, but do not mention Havelok’s
    name.]


§ 10. Before proceeding to consider the _prose_ Chronicle of the Brute,
it is better to speak first of the translation of Peter de Langtoft’s
Chronicle by Robert of Brunne, a translation which was completed A.D.
1338. At p. 25 of Hearne’s edition is the following passage:

 ‘Ȝit a nother Danes Kyng in the North gan aryue.
  Alfrid it herd, thidere gan he dryue.
  _Hauelok_[9] fader he was, _Gunter_ was his name.
  He brent citees & tounes, ouer alle did he schame.
  Saynt Cutbertes clerkes tho Danes thei dred.
  The toke the holy bones, about thei tham led.
  Seuen ȝere thorgh the land wer thei born aboute,
  It comforted the kyng mykelle, whan he was in doute
  ¶ Whan Alfrid & Gunter had werred long in ille,
  Thorgh the grace of God, Gunter turned his wille.
  Cristend wild he be, the kyng of fonte him lift,
  & thritty of his knyghtes turnes, thorgh Godes gift.
  Tho that first were foos, and com of paien lay,
  Of Cristen men haf los, & so thei wend away.’

“This is the whole that appears in the original, but after the above
lines immediately follows, in the language of Robert of Brunne himself
(as noted also by Hearne, Pref. p. lxvii.), the following curious, and
to our inquiry, very important passage:”

 ‘Bot I haf grete ferly, that I fynd no man,
  That has writen in story, how Hauelok this lond wan.
  Noither _Gildas_, no Bede, no Henry of Huntynton,
  No William of Malmesbiri, ne Pers of Bridlynton,
  Writes not in ther bokes of no kyng Athelwold,
  Ne Goldeburgh his douhtere, ne Hauelok not of told,
  Whilk tyme the were kynges, long or now late,
  Thei mak no menyng whan, no in what date.
  Bot that thise _lowed men vpon Inglish tellis_,
  Right story can me not ken, the certeynte what spellis.
  Men sais in Lyncoln castelle ligges ȝit a stone,
  That Hauelok kast wele forbi euer ilkone
  & ȝit the chapelle standes, ther he weddid his wife,
  Goldeburgh the kynges douhter, _that saw is ȝit rife_.
  & of Gryme a fisshere, _men redes ȝit in ryme_,
  That he bigged Grymesby Gryme that ilk tyme.
  Of alle stories of honoure, that I haf thorgh souht,
  I fynd that no compiloure of him tellis ouht.
  Sen I fynd non redy, that tellis of Hauelok kynde
  Turne we to that story, that we writen fynde.’

“There cannot exist the smallest doubt, that by the ‘Ryme’ here
mentioned ‘that lowed men vpon Inglish tellis,’ the identical English
Romance, now before the reader, is referred to. It must therefore
certainly have been composed prior to the period at which Robert of
Brunne wrote,[10] in whose time the traditions respecting Havelok at
Lincoln were so strongly preserved, as to point out various localities
to which the story had affixed a name, and similar traditions connected
with the legend, as we shall find hereafter, existed also at Grimsby.
The doubts expressed by the Chronicler, as to their authenticity, or the
authority of the ‘Ryme,’ are curious, but only of value so far as they
prove he was ignorant of the existence of a French Romance on the
subject, or of its reception in Gaimar’s historical poem.”

    [Footnote 9: This proof is rendered unnecessary by the citations
    from it by Rauf de Boun in 1310, and by the age of our MS.
    itself.]

    [Footnote 10: _Hanelok_ in Hearne, throughout, but undoubtedly
    _contra fidem_ MSS.]


§ 11. “But on consulting the Lambeth copy of Rob. of Brunne, in order to
verify the passage as printed by Hearne from the Inner Temple MS. we
were not a little surprised to ascertain a fact hitherto overlooked, and
indeed unknown, viz. that the Lambeth MS. (which is a folio, written on
paper, and imperfect both at the beginning and close)[11] does not
correspond with the Edition, but has evidently been revised by a later
hand, which has abridged the Prologues, omitted some passages, and
inserted others. The strongest proof of this exists in the passage
before us, in which the Lambeth MS. entirely omits the lines of Rob. of
Brunne respecting the authenticity of the story of Havelok, and in their
place substitutes an abridged outline of the story itself, copied
apparently from the French Chronicle of Gaimar. The interpolation is so
curious, and so connected with our inquiry, as to be a sufficient
apology for introducing it here.”

 ‘¶ Forth wente Gounter & his folk, al in to Denemark,
  Sone fel ther hym vpon, a werre styth & stark,
  Thurgh a Breton kyng, th^t out of Ingeland cam,
  & asked the tribut of Denmark, th^t Arthur whylom nam.
  They wythseide hit schortly, & non wolde they ȝelde,
  But rather they wolde dereyne hit, wyth bataill y the felde.
  Both partis on a day, to felde come they stronge,
  Desconfit were the danes, Gounter his deth gan fonge.
  When he was ded they schope brynge, al his blod to schame,
  But Gatferes doughter the kyng, _Eleyne_ was hure name,
  Was kyng Gounteres wyf, and had a child hem bytwene,
  Wyth wham scheo scapede vnethe, al to the se with tene.
  The child hym highte HAUELOK, th^t was his moder dere,
  Scheo mette with grym atte hauene, a wel god marinere,
  He hure knew & highte hure wel, to helpe hure with his might,
  To bryng hure saf out of the lond, wythinne th^t ilke night.
  When they come in myd se, a gret meschef gan falle,
  They metten wyth a gret schip, lade wyth outlawes alle.
  Anon they fullen hem apon, & dide hem Mikel peyne,
  So th^t wyth strengthe of their assaut, ded was quene Eleyne.
  But ȝyt ascapede from hem Grym, wyth Hauelok & other fyue,
  & atte the hauene of Grymesby, ther they gon aryue.
  Ther was brought forth child Hauelok, wyth Grym & his fere,
  Right als hit hadde be ther own, for other wyste men nere.
  Til he was mykel & mighti, & man of mykel cost,
  Th^t for his grete sustinaunce, nedly serue he most.
  He tok leue of Grym & Seburc, as of his sire & dame,
  And askede ther blessinge curteysly, ther was he nought to blame.
  Thenne drow he forth northward, to kynges court Edelsie,
  Th^t held fro Humber to Rotland, the kyngdam of Lyndesye.
  Thys Edelsy of Breton kynde, had Orewayn his sister bright
  Maried to a noble kyng, of Northfolk Egelbright.
  Holly for his kyngdam, he held in his hand,
  Al the lond fro Colchestre, right in til Holand.
  Thys Egelbright th^t was a Dane, & Orewayn the quene,
  Hadden gete on Argill, a doughter hem bytwene.
  Sone then deyde Egelbright, & his wyf Orewayn,
  & therfore was kyng Edelsye, bothe joyful & fayn.
  Anon their doughter & here Eyr, his nece dame Argill,
  & al the kyngdam he tok in hande, al at his owene will.
  Ther serued Hauelok as quistron, & was y-cald Coraunt,
  He was ful mykel & hardy, & strong as a Geaunt.
  He was bold Curteys & fre, & fair & god of manere,
  So th^t alle folk hym louede, th^t auewest hym were.
  But for couetise of desheraison, of damysele Argill,
  & for a chere th^t the kyng sey, scheo made Coraunt till,
  He dide hem arraye ful symplely, & wedde togydere bothe,
  For he ne rewarded desparagyng, were manion ful wrothe.
  A while they dwelt after in court, in ful pore degre,
  The schame & sorewe th^t Argill hadde, hit was a deol to se.
  Then seyde scheo til hure maister, of whenne sire be ȝe?
  Haue ȝe no kyn ne frendes at hom, in ȝoure contre?
  Leuer were me lyue in pore lyf, wythoute schame & tene,
  Than in schame & sorewe, lede the astat of quene.
  Thenne wente they forth to Grymesby, al by his wyues red,
  & founde th^t Grym & his wyf, weren bothe ded.
  But he fond ther on Aunger, Grymes cosyn hend,
  To wham th^t Grym & his wyf, had teld word & ende.
  How th^t hit stod wyth Hauelok, in all manere degre,
  & they hit hym telde & conseilled, to drawe til his contre,
  Tasaye what grace he mighte fynde, among his frendes there,
  & they wolde ordeyne for their schipynge, and al th^t hem nede were.
  When Aunger hadde y-schiped hem, they seilled forth ful swythe,
  Ful-but in til Denemark, wyth weder fair & lithe.
  Ther fond he on sire Sykar, a man of gret pousté,
  Th^t hey styward somtyme was, of al his fader fe.
  Ful fayn was he of his comyng, & god help him behight,
  To recouere his heritage, of Edulf kyng & knyght.
  Sone asembled they gret folk, of his sibmen & frendes,
  Kyng Edulf gadered his power, & ageyn them wendes.
  Desconfyt was ther kyng Edulf, & al his grete bataill,
  & so conquered Hauelok, his heritage saunz faille.
  Sone after he schop him gret power, in toward Ingelond,
  His wyues heritage to wynne, ne wolde he nought wonde.
  Th^t herde the kyng of Lyndeseye, he was come on th^t cost,
  & schop to fighte wyth hym sone, & gadered hym gret host.
  But atte day of bataill, Edelsy was desconfit,
  & after by tretys gaf Argentill, hure heritage al quit.
  & for scheo was next of his blod, Hauelokes wyf so feyr,
  He gaf hure Lyndesey after his day, & made hure his Eyr.
  & atte last so byfel, th^t vnder Hauelokes schelde,
  Al Northfolk & Lyndeseye, holy of hym they helde.’

    MS. Lamb. 131. leaf 76.

    [Footnote 11: The writing in the earlier portion (concerning
    Havelok) is hardly later than A.D. 1400.]


§ 12. We now come to the prose Chronicle called The Brute, which became
exceedingly popular, and was the foundation of “Caxton’s Chronicle,”
first printed by Caxton A.D. 1480, but of which Caxton was not the
author, though he may have added some of the last chapters. The original
is in French, and was probably compiled a few years _before_ Robert of
Brunne’s translation of Langtoft was made, as it concludes with the year
1331, or, in some copies, with 1332. The author of it is not known, but
it was probably only regarded as a compilation from the Chronicles of
the earlier Historians. “In this Chronicle, in all its various shapes,
is contained the Story of Havelock, _engrafted on the British History of
Geoffrey of Monmouth_, and in its detail, following precisely the French
text of the Romance. The only variation of consequence is the
substitution of the name of Birkabeyn (as in the English text) for that
of Gunter, and in some copies, both of the French and English MSS. of
the Chronicle, the name of _Goldeburgh_ is inserted instead of
_Argentille_; which variations are the more curious, as they prove the
absolute identity of the story. For the sake of a more complete
illustration of what has been advanced, we are induced to copy the
passage at length, as it appears in the French Chronicle, taken from a
well-written MS. of the 14th century, MS. Reg. 20 A 3, fol. 165 b.”[12]

  ‘_Des Rois Adelbright & Edelfi_, Cap. IIIJ^xx. XIX.

  Apres le Roi Constantin estoient deux Rois en graunt Brutaigne,
  dount li vns out a noun Aldelbright, & fust Danois, & [tint] tut le
  pais de Norff’ & de Suffolk, & ly altre out a noun Edelfi, q{e} fust
  Brittone, & tint Nicol & Lindesey, & tote la terre desqes a Humber,
  Ceux deux Rois soi entreguerroierent, [& moult s’entrehaierent] mais
  puis furent il entre acordez & soi entreamerent, taunt com s’il
  vssent estee freres de vn ventre neez. Le Roi Edelfi out vne soer,
  Orewenne par noun, & la dona par grant amour al Roi Aldelbright a
  femme. Et il engendra de ly vne fille q{e} out a noun Argentille. En
  le tierez an apres vne greue Maladie ly suruint, si deuereit morrir,
  & maunda par vn iour al Roi Edelfi, soun frere en lei, q’il venist a
  ly parler, & cil ly emparla volentiers. Donqe ly pria le Roi
  Aldelbright et ly coniura en le noun [de] Dieu, q’il apres sa mort
  preist Argentille sa fille, & sa terre, & q’il la feist honestement
  garder [& nurrir] en sa chambre, & quant ele serreit de age, q’il la
  feist marier al plus fort hom & plus vaillaunt q’il porroit trouer,
  & q{e} a donqe ly rendist sa terre. Edelfi ceo graunta, & par
  serment afferma sa priere. Et quant Adelbright fust mort, &
  enterree, Edelfi prist la damoysele, & la norrist en sa chambre, si
  deuynt ele la plus beale creature q{e} hom porreit trouer.

  _Coment le Roi Edelfi Maria la damoisele Argentille a vn quistroun
  de sa quisine._ Cap^m. C.

  Le Roi Edelfi, q{e} fust vncle a la Damoysele Argentille, pensa
  fausement coment il porreit la terre sa Nece auoir par touz iours, &
  malueisement countre soun serment pensa a deceiure la pucelle, si la
  maria a vn quistroun de sa quisyne q{e} fust apellée Curan, si
  esteit il le plus haut, le plus fort, & le plus vaillaunt de corps,
  q{e} hom sauoit nulle part a cel temps, & la quidoit hountousement
  marier, pur auoir sa terre a remenaunt, Mais il fust deceu. Car cest
  Curan fust [le Roi] Hauelok, filz le Roi Kirkebain de Denemarche, &
  il conquist la terre sa femme [en Bretaigne], & occist le Roi
  Edelfi, vncle sa femme, & conquist tote la terre, _si com aillours
  est trouée plus pleinement_ [_en l’estorie_], & il ne regna q{e}
  treis aunz. Car Saxsouns & Danoys le occirent, & ceo fust grant
  damage a tote la grant Brutaigne. Et les Brutouns le porterent a
  Stonhenge, & illoeqes ly enterrerent a grant honour.’

    [Footnote 12: Sir F. Madden adds-- “collated with another of the
    same age, MS. Cott. Dom. A. x, and a third, of the 15th century,
    MS. Harl. 200.” I omit the collations; the words within square
    brackets are supplied from these other copies.]


§ 13. “With the above may be compared the English version, as extant in
MS. Harl. 2279, which agrees with the Ed. of Caxton, except in the
occasional substitution of one word for another.”[13]

  ‘MS. Harl. 2279, f. 47._ Of the kinges Albright & of Edelf._ Ca^o
  IIII^xx. XI^o.

  After kyng Constantinus deth, ther were .ij. kynges in Britaigne,
  that one men callede Adelbright, that was a Danoys, and helde the
  cuntray of Northfolk and Southfolk, that other hight Edelf, and was
  a Britoun & helde Nichole, Lindeseye, and alle the lande vnto
  Humber. Thes ij. kynges faste werred togeders, but afterward thei
  were acorded, and louede togedere as thei had ben borne of o bodie.
  The kyng Edelf had a suster that men callede Orewenne, and he yaf
  here thurghe grete frenshipe to kyng Adelbright to wif, and he
  begate on here a doughter that men callede Argentille, and in the
  .iij. yeer after him come vppon a strong sekenesse that nedes he
  muste die, and he sent to kyng Edelf, his brother in lawe, that he
  shulde come and speke with him, and he come to him with good wille.
  Tho prayed he the kyng and coniurede also in the name of God, that
  after whan he were dede, he shulde take Argentil his doughter, and
  the lande, and that he kepte hir wel, and noreshed in his chambre;
  and whan she were of age he shulde done here be mariede to the
  strongest and worthiest man that he myȝt fynde, and than he shulde
  yelde vp her lande ayen. Edelf hit grauntid, and bi othe hit
  confermede his prayer. And whan Adelbright was dede and Enterede,
  Edelfe toke the damesel Argentil, and noreshid her in his chambre,
  and she become the fayrest creature th^t myȝt lif, or eny man finde.

  _How kyng Edelf mariede the damysel Argentil to a knaue of his
  kichyn._ Ca^o IIII^xx. XII.

  This kyng Edelf, that was vncle to the damesel Argentil, bithought
  how that he myȝte falsliche haue the lande from his nece for
  euermore, and falsly ayens his othe thouȝte to desceyue the damysel,
  and marie here to a knave of his kichon, that men callede Curan, and
  he become the worthiest and strengest man of bodie that eny man wist
  in eny lande that tho leuede. And to him he thouȝt here shendfully
  haue mariede, for to haue had here lande afterward; but he was clene
  desceyuede. For this Curan that was Hauelokis son that was kyng of
  Kirkelane in Denmark, and this Curan Conquerede his wifes landes,
  and slow kyng Edelf, that was his wifes vncle, and had alle here
  lande, as in a-nother stede hit [MS. but] telleth more oponly, and
  he ne regnede but iij. yeer, for Saxones and Danoys him quelde, and
  that was grete harme to al Britaigne, and Britouns bere him to
  Stonehenge, and ther thei him interede with mochel honour and
  solempnite.’

“It must not be concealed, that in some copies, viz. in MSS. Harl. 1337,
6251, Digby 185, Hatton 50, Ashmole 791 and 793, the story is altogether
omitted, and Conan made to succeed to Arthur. In those copies also of
the English Polychronicon, the latter part of which resembles the above
Chronicle, the passage is not found.” “Among the Harl. MSS. (No. 63) is
a copy of the same Chronicle in an abridged form, in which the name of
_Goldesburghe_ is substituted for that of Argentille.” Sir F. Madden now
adds--that “the story occurs also in some interpolated copies of Higden
(the Latin text, viz. MSS. Harl. 655, Cott. Jul. E. 8, Reg. 13 E. 1). In
an earlier form it is found in a Latin Chronicle of the 13th century,
MS. Cott. Dom. A. 2, fol. 130.”

    [Footnote 13: I omit the collations with MSS. Harl. 24 and 753.
    Sir F. Madden proves that this English version was made A.D. 1435,
    by _John Maundevile_, rector of Burnham Thorp in Norfolk.]


§ 14. “It was, in all probability, to this Chronicle also, in its
original form, that Thomas Gray, the author of the _Scala Cronica_ (or
_Scale Cronicon_), a Chronicle in French prose, composed between the
years 1355 and 1362, is indebted for his knowledge of the tale.” The
original MS. is No. 132 in the library of Corpus Christi College,
Cambridge, and was edited by Stevenson for the Maitland Club in 1836.
The passage relative to Havelok is translated by Leland, _Collectanea_,
vol. i. pt. 2, p. 511. This account resembles the others, and involves
no new point of interest.


§ 15. I may here introduce the remark, that the story is also to be
found in the _Eulogium Historiarum_, ed. Haydon, 1860, vol. ii. p. 378.
I here quote the passage at length, as it is not referred to in Sir F.
Madden’s edition. The date of the Chronicle is about 1366. For various
readings, see Haydon’s edition.

  Non enim est prætermittendum de quodam Dano generoso ætate juvenili
  florente, qui tempore regis Edelfridi casualiter Angliam adiit, qui
  a propria patria expulsus per quendam ducem falsissimum, cui pater
  ejus illum commiserat ipso moriente et ducem rogavit ut puerum
  nutriret usque dum posset Denemarchiæ regnum viriliter gubernare.
  Dux vero malitiam machinans juvenem hæredem rectum, Hauelok nomine,
  voluit occidisse. Puer vero comperiens aufugit per latibula usque
  dum quidam Anglicus et mercator in illis partibus adventaret; nomen
  autem mercatoris Grym vocitabatur. Hauelok autem, Grym rogans ut
  ipsum in Angliam transvectaret, ipse autem annuens, puerum secum
  conduxit et cum eo per aliquot tempus apud Grymesby morabatur.
  Tandem ipsum ad curiam regis Edelfridi conduxit et ibi in coquina
  regis moratus est.

  Rex autem Edelfridus quamdam habuit sororem nomine Orwen et illam
  maritavit regi Athelberto, quod conjugium inter duos reges vinculum
  amoris catenavit. Rex autem Athelbert terram citra Trentam cum regio
  diademate occupavit, cum terra de Northfolk’ et de Southfolk’ et eis
  adjacentibus. Rex vero Edelfrid comitatum Lincolniæ et Lyndeseye et
  eis spectantibus. Ante maritagium puellæ Orwen illi duo reges semper
  debellabant, post matrimonium factum nulla fuit divisio, nec in
  familia inter eos nec in dominio.

  Rex vero Ethelbert de uxore sua quamdam filiam genuit, nomine
  Argentile, pulcherrimam valde. Athelberto obiente, vel ante mortem
  ejus, regem rogavit Edelfridum ut filiam suam homini fortissimo ac
  validiori totius sui regni in conjugium copularet, nihil doli vel
  mali machinans.

  Rex autem Adelfrid omnem malitiam ingeminans de conjugio puellæ
  malitiose disponens, cogitans se habere unum lixam in coquina sua
  qui omnes homines regni sui in vigore et fortitudine superabat, et
  juxta votum patris puellæ ad illum hominem fortissimum illam
  generosam juvenculam toro maritali copulavit, ob cupiditatem regni
  puellæ ipsam ita enormiter maritabat. Hauelok in patria Danemarchiæ
  et Argentile in Britannia æquali sorte ad custodiendum deputati
  sunt, totum tamen nutu Divino cedebat eis in honorem. Nam Hauelok
  post paucos annos regnum Britanniæ adoptus est, et a Saxonibus
  tandem occisus et apud le Stonhenge est sepultus. Pater ejus
  Kirkeban vocabatur.

This agrees closely with the accounts given above (§ 12 and § 13). The
chief point to be noticed is that this account identifies Edelfrid with
the Æthelfrith son of Æthelric who was king of the Northumbrians from
A.D. 593 to 617, according to the computation of the A.S. Chronicle, and
who was succeeded by Eadwine son of Ælle, who drove out the æthelings or
sons of Æthelfrith. It may be remarked further, that the same Æthelfrith
is called Æluric by Laȝamon, who gives him a very bad character; see
Laȝamon, ed. Madden, vol. iii. p. 195.


§ 16. The story is also mentioned by Henry de Knyghton, a canon of
Leicester abbey, whose history concludes with the year 1395. But his is
no fresh evidence, as it is evidently borrowed from the French Chronicle
of Rauf de Boun; see § 7. It is also alluded to in a blundering manner
in a short historical compilation extending from the time of Brutus to
the reign of Henry VI., and preserved in MS. Cotton Calig. A. 2. At fol.
107 _b_ is the passage-- “Ethelwolde, qui generavit filiam de (_sic_)
Haueloke de Denmarke, per quem Danes per cccc. annos postea fecerunt
clameum Anglie.” Some omission after the word _de_ has turned the
passage into nonsense; but it is noteworthy as expressing the claim of
the Danes to the English crown by right of descent from Havelok; a claim
which is more clearly expressed in MS. Harl. 63, in which the King of
Denmark is represented as sending a herald to Æthelstan (A.D. 927)-- “to
witte wheder he wold fynde a man to fight w{i}t{h} Colbrande[14] for the
righ[t]e of the kyngdom Northumbr{e}, that the Danes had claymed byfore
by the title of kyng Haueloke, that wedded Goldesburghe the kyngis
daughter of Northumbr{e}” --fol. 19.[15] Four hundred years before this
date would intimate some year early in the sixth century. Finally, the
story is found at a later period in Caxton’s Chronicle (A.D. 1480) as
above intimated in § 12; whence it was adopted by Warner, and inserted
into his poem entitled Albion’s England; book iv. chap. 20, published in
1586. Warner called it the tale of “Argentile and Curan;” and in this
ballad-shape it was reprinted in Percy’s Reliques of Ancient Poetry
(vol. ii. p. 261; ed. 1812) with the same title. Not long after, in
1617, another author, William Webster, published a larger poem in
six-line stanzas; but this is a mere paraphrase of Warner. The title
is-- “The most pleasant and delightful historie of Curan, a prince of
Danske, and the fayre princesse Argentile,” &c. John Fabyan, in his
Concordance of Historyes, first printed in 1516, alludes to the two
kings Adelbryght and Edill, only to dismiss the “longe processe”
concerning them, as not supported by sufficient authority. See p. 82 of
the reprint by Ellis, 4to, 1811.

    [Footnote 14: Colbrande is the giant defeated by Guy in the
    Ballad of “Guy and Colebrande.” See _Percy Folio MS._; ed. Hales
    and Furnivall, vol. ii. p. 528, where _Auelocke_ means _Anlaf_.]

    [Footnote 15: Quoted in a note in Sir F. Madden’s preface,
    p. xxiii.]


§ 17. The only other two sources whence any further light can be thrown
upon our subject are the traditions of Denmark and Grimsby. A letter
addressed by Sir F. Madden to Professor Rask elicited a reply which was
equivalent to saying that next to nothing is known about it in Denmark.
This seems to be the right place to mention a small book of 80 pages,
published at Copenhagen in the present year (1868), and entitled “Sagnet
om Havelok Danske; fortalt af Kristian Köster.” It contains
(1) a version, in Danish prose, of the English poem; (2) a version of
the same story, following the French texts of the Arundel and Royal
MSS.; and (3) some elucidations of the legend. The author proposes a
theory that Havelok is really the Danish king Amlet, i.e. Hamlet; but I
have not space here to state all his arguments. As far as I follow them,
some of the chief ones are these; that Havelok ought to be found in the
list of Danish kings;[16] that Hamlet’s simulation of folly or madness
is paralleled by Havelok’s behaviour, as expressed in ll. 945-954 of our
poem; and that both Hamlet and Havelok succeeded in fulfilling the
revenge which they had long cherished secretly. But I am not much
persuaded by these considerations, for, even granting some resemblance
in the names,[17] the resemblance in the stories is very slight. But I
must refer the reader to the book itself.

    [Footnote 16: So then ought Hamlet; but the editor of Saxo
    Grammaticus says, “in antiquioribus regum Daniæ genealogiis
    Amlethus non occurrit.” See Saxo Gram. ed. Müller, Havniæ, 1839;
    end of lib. iii. and beginning of lib. iv.; also the note on
    p. 132 of the Notæ Uberiores. The idea that Havelock is Amlet is
    to be found in Grundtvig, North. Myth. 1832, p. 565.]

    [Footnote 17: Havelok [_or_ Hanelock, as it is sometimes read]
    is quite as like Anlaf, whence the blunder noticed in note 1,
    p. xviii. In the form Hablok, it is not unlike _Blecca_, who was a
    great man in _Lindesey_ soon after the days of _Æthelberht_ of
    Kent; see Saxon Chronicle, An. DCXXVII.]


§ 18. Turning however to local traditions, we find that Camden briefly
alludes to the story in a contemptuous manner (p. 353; ed. 8vo, Lond.
1587); but Gervase Holles is far from being disposed to regard it as
fabulous. In his MSS. collections for Lincolnshire, preserved in MS.
Harl. 6829, he thus speaks of the story we are examining.[18]

  “And it will not be amisse, to say something concerning y^e Common
  tradition of her first founder Grime, as y^e inhabitants (with a
  Catholique faith) name him. The tradition it thus. _Grime_ (say
  they) a poore Fisherman (as he was launching into y^e Riuer for fish
  in his little boate vpon Humber) espyed not far from him another
  little boate, empty (as he might conceaue) which by y^e fauour of
  y^e wynde & tyde still approached nearer & nearer vnto him. He
  betakes him to his oares, & meetes itt, wherein he founde onely a
  Childe wrapt in swathing clothes, purposely exposed (as it should
  seeme) to y^e pittylesse [rage] of y^e wilde & wide Ocean. He moued
  with pitty, takes itt home, & like a good foster-father carefully
  nourisht itt, & endeauoured to nourishe it in his owne occupation:
  but y^e childe contrarily was wholy deuoted to exercises of
  actiuity, & when he began to write man, to martiall sports, & at
  length by his signall valour obteyned such renowne, y^t he marryed
  y^e King of England’s daughter, & last of all founde who was his
  true Father, & that he was Sonne to y^e King of Denmarke; & for y^e
  comicke close of all; that _Haueloke_ (for such was his name)
  exceedingly aduanced & enriched his foster-father Grime, who thus
  enriched, builded a fayre Towne neare the place where Hauelocke was
  founde, & named it Grimesby. Thus say some: others differ a little
  in y^e circumstances, as namely, that Grime was not a Fisherman, but
  a Merchant, & that Hauelocke should be preferred to y^e King’s
  kitchin, & there liue a longe tyme as a Scullion: but however y^e
  circumstances differ, they all agree in y^e consequence, as
  concerning y^e Towne’s foundation, to which (sayth y^e story)
  Hauelocke y^e Danish prince, afterward graunted many immunityes.
  This is y^e famous Tradition concerning Grimsby w^ch learned Mr.
  Cambden gives so little creditt to, that he thinkes it onely _illis
  dignissima, qui anilibus fabulis noctem solent protrudere_.”

And again, after shewing that _by_ is the Danish for _town_, and quoting
a passage about Havelock’s father being named Gunter, which may be found
in Weever (Ancient Funeral Monuments, fol. Lond. 1631, p. 749), he
proceeds:

  “that Hauelocke did sometymes reside in Grimsby, may be gathered
  from a great blew Boundry-stone, lying at y^e East ende of
  Briggowgate, which retaines y^e name of _Hauelock’s-Stone_ to this
  day. Agayne y^e great priuiledges & immunityes, that this Towne hath
  in Denmarke aboue any other in England (as freedome from Toll, & y^e
  rest) may fairely induce a Beleife, that some preceding favour, or
  good turne called on this remuneration. But lastly (which proofe I
  take to be _instar omnium_) the Common Seale of y^e Towne, & that a
  most auncient one,” &c. [Here follows a description of the Seal.]

“The singular fact,” adds Sir F. Madden, “alluded to by Holles, of the
Burgesses of Grimsby being free from toll at the Port of Elsineur, in
Denmark, is confirmed by the Rev. G. Oliver, in his Monumental
Antiquities of Grimsby, 8vo, Hull, 1825, who is inclined from that, and
other circumstances, to believe the story is not so totally without
foundation.” There is also an absurd local story that the church at
Grimsby, which has now but one turret, formerly had four, three of which
were kicked down by Grim in his anxiety to destroy some hostile vessels.
The first fell among the enemy’s fleet; the second dropped in
Wellowgate, and is now Havelock’s stone; the third fell within the
churchyard, but the fourth his strength failed to move. Perhaps amongst
the most interesting notices of the story are the following words by Sir
Henry Havelock, whose family seems to have originally resided in Durham.
His own account, however, is this. “My father, William Havelock,
descended from a family which formerly resided at Grimsby in
Lincolnshire, and was himself born at Guisborough in Yorkshire.”[19] And
it may at least be said with perfect truth, that if the name of
_Havelock_ was not famous formerly, it is famous now.

    [Footnote 18: His account has been printed in the _Topographer_,
    V. i. p. 241. sq. 8vo, 1789. We follow, as usual, the MS. itself,
    p. 1.]

    [Footnote 19: Quoted in Brock’s Biography of Sir H. Havelock,
    1858; p. 9.]


§ 19. The last evidence for the legend is the still-existing seal of the
corporation of Great Grimsby. The engraving of this seal, as it appears
in the present edition, was made from a copy kindly furnished to the
E.E.T.S. by the Mayor of Grimsby, and I here subjoin a description of
it, communicated to me by J. Hopkin, Esq., Jun., of Grimsby, which was
first printed, in a slightly different form, in Notes and Queries, 2nd
Series, vol. xi. p. 41; see also p. 216.

  “The ancient Town Seal of Great Grimsby is engraven on a circular
  piece of brass not very thick; and on the back, which is rather
  arched, is a small projecting piece of brass, placed as a substitute
  for a handle, in order when taking an impression the more easily to
  detach the matrix from the Wax. This seal is in an excellent state
  of preservation, and is inscribed in Saxon characters ‘Sigillvm
  Comunitatis Grimebye’ and represents thereon Gryme (‘Gryem’) who by
  tradition is reported to have been a native of Souldburg in Denmark,
  where he gained a precarious livelihood by fishing and piracy; but
  having, as is supposed, during the reign of Ethelbert,[20] been
  accidentally driven into the Humber by a furious storm, he landed on
  the Lincolnshire Coast near Grimsby, he being at this time miserably
  poor and almost destitute of the common necessaries of life; for
  Leland represents this ‘poor fisschar’ as being so very needy that
  he was not ‘able to kepe his sunne Cuaran for poverty.’ Gryme,
  finding a capacious haven adapted to his pursuits, built himself a
  house and commenced and soon succeeded in establishing a very
  lucrative Trade with Norway, Sweden, and Denmark. Other Merchants
  having in process of time settled near him, attracted by the
  commercial advantages offered by this excellent Harbour, they
  jointly constructed convenient appendages for extensive Trade, and
  the colony soon rose into considerable importance, and became known
  at an early period by the name of Grimsby. For not only was Grimsby
  constituted a borough so early as the seventh century, but Peter of
  Langtoft speaks of it as a frontier Town and the boundary of a
  Kingdom erected by the conquests of Egbert in the year 827, which he
  states included all that portion of the Island which lay between
  ‘the maritime Towns of Grymsby and Dover.’ So that even at that
  period, Grimsby must have been a place of peculiar strength and
  importance. Gryme is represented on the seal as a man of gigantic
  stature with comparatively short hair, a shaven chin, and a
  moustache, holding in his right hand a drawn sword and bearing on
  his left arm a circular shield with an ornate boss and rim. The
  sleeveless tunic above his under vest is most probably the panzar or
  panzara of the Danes. Between his feet is a Conic object, possibly
  intended for a helmet, as it resembles the chapelle-de-fer worn by
  William Rufus on his Great Seal, and which in the laws of Gula is
  distinguished as the Steel hufe. On the right hand of Gryme stands
  his protégé Haveloc (‘Habloc’), whom, during one of his mercantile
  excursions soon after his arrival in Lincolnshire, Gryme had the
  good fortune to save from imminent danger of Shipwreck, and who
  proved to be the Son of Gunter, King of Denmark, and who was
  therefore conveyed to the British Court, where he subsequently
  received in marriage Goldburgh, the Daughter of the British
  Sovereign. Above Gryme is represented a hand, being emblematical of
  the hand of providence by which Haveloc was preserved, and near the
  hand is the star which marks the point where the inscription begins
  and ends. Haveloc made such a favourable representation of his
  preserver at the British and Danish Courts, that he procured for him
  many honours and privileges. From the British Monarch Gryme, who had
  already realised an abundance of wealth, received a charter, and was
  made the chief governor of Grimsby; and the Danish Sovereign granted
  to the Town an immunity (which is still possessed by the Burgesses
  of Grimsby) from all Tolls at the Port of Elsineur. Gryme afterwards
  lived in Grimsby like a petty prince in his Hereditary Dominions.
  Above Haveloc is represented a crown and in his right hand is a
  battle axe, the favourite weapon of the Northmen, and in his right
  hand is a ring which he is presenting to the British Princess
  Goldburgh (‘Goldebvrgh’), who stands on the left side of Gryme and
  whose right hand is held towards the Ring. Over her head is a Regal
  Diadem, and in her left hand is a Sceptre. Sir F. Madden states that
  it is certain that this seal is at least as old as the time of
  Edward I. (and therefore contemporaneous with the MS.) as the legend
  is written in a character which after the year 1300 fell into
  disuse, and was succeeded by the black letter, or _Gothic_.”

    [Footnote 20: Æthelberht of Kent reigned from A.D. 560-616 (56
    years).]


§ 20. SKETCH OF THE STORY OF “Le Lai d’Aueloc.”[21]

It is my intention to offer some remarks on the probable sources of the
legend, and to fix a conjectural date for the existence of Havelok. But
it is obviously convenient that a sketch of the story should first be
given. It appears, however, that the resemblance between the French and
English versions is by no means very close, and it will be necessary to
give separate abstracts of them. I begin with the French version, in
which I follow the Norfolk MS. rather than the abridgment by Gaimar.
I have already said that the former is printed in Sir F. Madden’s
edition, and that it was reprinted by M. Michel with the title “Lai
d’Havelok le Danois,” Paris, 1833, and by Mr Wright for the Caxton
Society in 1850.

  The Britons made a lay concerning King Havelok, who is surnamed
  Cuaran. His father was Gunter, King of the Danes. Arthur crossed the
  sea, and invaded Denmark. Gunter perished by the treason of Hodulf,
  who gained the kingdom, and held it of Arthur. Gunter had a fine
  castle, where his wife and son were guarded, being committed to the
  protection of Grim. The child was but seven years old; but ever as
  he slept, an odorous flame issued from his mouth. Hodulf sought
  to kill him, but Grim prepared a ship, and furnished it with
  provisions, wherein he placed the queen and the child, and set
  sail from Denmark. On their voyage they encountered pirates
  (“outlaghes”), who killed them all after a hard fight, excepting
  Grim, who was an acquaintance of theirs, and Grim’s wife and
  children. Havelok also was saved. They at last arrived at the haven,
  afterwards named “Grimesbi” from Grim. Grim there resumed his old
  trade, a fisherman’s, and a town grew up round his hut, which was
  called Grimsby. The child grew up, and waxed strong. One day Grim
  said to him, “Son, you will never thrive as a fisherman; take your
  brothers with you, and seek service amongst the King’s servants.” He
  was soon well apparelled, and repaired with his two foster-brothers
  to Nicole [Lincoln].[22] Now at that time there was a king named
  Alsi, who ruled over all Nicole and Lindesie;[23] but the country
  southward was governed by another king, named Ekenbright, who had
  married Alsi’s sister Orewen. These two had one only daughter, named
  Argentille. Ekenbright, falling ill, committed Argentille to the
  care of Alsi, till she should be of age to be married to the
  strongest man that can be found. At Ekenbright’s death, Alsi reigned
  over both countries, holding his court at Nicole. Havelok, on his
  arrival there, was employed to carry water and cut wood, and to
  perform all menial offices requiring great strength. He was named
  Cuaran, which means--in the British language--a scullion. Argentille
  soon arrived at marriageable age, and Alsi determined to marry her
  to Cuaran, which would sufficiently fulfil her father’s wish--Cuaran
  being confessedly the strongest man in those parts. To this marriage
  he compelled her to consent, hoping thereby to disgrace her for
  ever. Havelok was unwilling that his wife should perceive the
  marvellous flame, but soon forgot this, and ere long fell asleep.
  Then had Argentille a strange vision--that a savage bear and some
  foxes attacked Cuaran, but dogs and boars defended him. A boar
  having killed the bear, the foxes cried for quarter from Cuaran, who
  commanded them to be bound. Then he would have put to sea, but the
  sea rose so high that he was terrified. Next she beheld two lions,
  at seeing which she was frightened, and she and Cuaran climbed a
  tree to avoid them; but the lions submitted themselves to him, and
  called him their lord. Then a great cry was raised, whereat she
  awoke, and beheld the miraculous flame. “Sir,” she exclaimed, “you
  burn!” But he reassured her, and, having heard her dream, said that
  it would soon come true. The next day, however, she again told her
  dream to a chamberlain, her friend, who said that he well knew a
  holy hermit who could explain it. The hermit explained to Argentille
  that Cuaran must be of royal lineage. “He will be king,” he said,
  “and you a queen. Ask him concerning his parentage. Remember also to
  repair to his native place.” On being questioned, Cuaran replied
  that he was born at Grimsby; that Grim was his father, and Saburc
  his mother. “Then let us go to Grimsby,” she replied. Accompanied by
  his two foster-brothers, they came to Grimsby; but Grim and Saburc
  were both dead. They found there, however, a daughter of Grim’s,
  named Kelloc, who had married a tradesman of that town. Up to this
  time Havelok had not known his true parentage, but Kelloc thought it
  was now time to tell him, and said: “Your father was Gunter, the
  King of the Danes, whom Hodulf slew. Hodulf obtained the kingdom as
  a grant from Arthur. Grim fled with you, and saved your life; but
  your mother perished at sea. Your name is HAVELOK. My husband will
  convey you to Denmark, where you must inquire for a lord named
  ‘Sigar l’estal;’ and take with you my two brothers.” So Kelloc’s
  husband conveyed them to Denmark, and advised Havelok to go to Sigar
  and show himself and his wife, as then he would be asked who his
  wife is. They went to the city of the seneschal, the before-named
  Sigar, where they craved a night’s lodging, and were courteously
  entertained. But as they retired to a lodging for the night, six men
  attacked them, who had been smitten with the beauty of Argentille.
  Havelok defended himself with an axe which he found, and slew five,
  whereupon the sixth fled. Havelok and his party fled away for refuge
  to a monastery, which was soon attacked by the townsmen who had
  heard of the combat. Havelok _mounted the tower_, and defended
  himself bravely, _casting down a huge stone on his enemies_.[24] The
  news soon reached the ears of Sigar, who hastened to see what the
  uproar was about. Beholding Havelok fixedly, he called to mind the
  form and appearance of Gunter, and asked Havelok of his parentage.
  Havelok replied that Grim had told him he was by birth a Dane, and
  that his mother perished at sea; and ended by briefly relating his
  subsequent adventures. Then Sigar asked him his name. “My name is
  Havelok,” he said, “and my other name is Cuaran.” Then the seneschal
  took him home, and determined to watch for the miraculous flame,
  which he soon perceived, and was assured that Havelok was the true
  heir. Therefore he gathered a great host of his friends, and sent
  for the horn which none but the true heir could sound, promising a
  ring to any one who could blow it. When all had failed, it was given
  to Havelok, who blew it loud and long, and was joyfully recognized
  and acknowledged to be the true King. Then with a great army he
  attacked Hodulf the usurper, whom he slew with his own hand. Thus
  was Havelok made King of Denmark.

  But after he had reigned four years, his wife incited him to return
  to England. With a great number of ships he sailed there, and
  arrived at Carleflure;[25] and sent messengers to Alsi, demanding
  the inheritance of Argentille. Alsi was indeed astonished at such a
  demand as coming from a scullion, and offered him battle. The hosts
  met at Theford,[26] and the battle endured till nightfall without a
  decisive result. But Argentille craftily advised her lord to support
  his dead men by stakes, to increase the apparent number of his army;
  and the next day Alsi, deceived by this device, treated for peace,
  and yielded up to his former ward all the land, from Holland[27] to
  Gloucester. Alsi had been so sorely wounded that he lived but
  fifteen days longer. Thus was Havelok king over Lincoln and Lindsey,
  and reigned over them for twenty years. Such is the lay of Cuaran.

    [Footnote 21: For this latter portion of the Preface I am
    entirely responsible.]

    [Footnote 22: _Nicole_ is a French inversion of Lincoln. It is
    not uncommon.]

    [Footnote 23: The northern part of Lincolnshire is called
    _Lindsey_.]

    [Footnote 24: Hence the obvious origin of the legend of
    “Havelok’s stone,” and the local tradition about Grim’s casting
    down stones from the tower of Grimsby church.]

    [Footnote 25: Possibly Saltfleet, suggests Mr Haigh. Such, at
    least, is the position required by the circumstances.]

    [Footnote 26: In the Durham MS. it is Tiedfort, i.e. Tetford,
    not far from Horncastle, in Lincolnshire.]

    [Footnote 27: A name given to the S.E. part of Lincolnshire.]


§ 21. The chief points to be noticed in Gaimar’s abridgment are the few
additional particulars to be gleaned from it. We there find that
Havelok’s mother was _Alvive_, a daughter of King _Gaifer_; that the
King of Nicole and Lindeseie was a _Briton_, and was named Edelsie; that
his sister, named Orwain, was married to Adelbrit, a _Dane_, who ruled
over Norfolk; and that Edelsie and Adelbrit lived in the days of
Costentin (Constantine), who succeeded Arthur. It is also said that the
usurper Hodulf was brother to Aschis, who is the Achilles of Geoffrey of
Monmouth. Another statement, that Havelok’s kingdom extended from
Holland to _Colchester_, seems to be an improvement upon “from Holland
to _Gloucester_.”

The words of Mr Petrie, in his remarks upon the lay in Monumenta
Historica Britannica, vol. i., may be quoted here. “Although both
[French versions] have the same story in substance, and often contain
lines exactly alike, yet, besides the different order in which the
incidents are narrated, each has occasionally circumstances wanting in
the other, and such too, it should seem, as would leave the story
incomplete unless supplied from the other copy. Thus, the visit to the
hermit, which is omitted in Gaimar, was probably in the original
romance; for without it Argentille’s dream tells for nothing; and in the
Arundel copy there is a particular account of Haveloc’s defence of a
tower by hurling stones on his assailants, which in Gaimar is so
obscurely alluded to as to be hardly intelligible. On the other hand,
instead of the description of the extraordinary virtues of Sygar’s ring
in Gaimar, it is merely said in the Arundel copy that Sygar would give
his _anel d’or_ to whoever could sound the horn; and, to omit other
instances, a festival is described in Gaimar on the authority of
_l’Estorie_, of which no notice whatever occurs in the Arundel MS.”


§ 22. SKETCH OF THE ENGLISH POEM.

The “Lay of Havelok” has been admirably paraphrased by Professor Morley,
in his “English Writers,” vol. i. pp. 459-467, a book which should be in
every reader’s hands, and which should by all means be consulted. I only
intend here to give a briefer outline, for the sake of comparing the
main features of our poem with those of the French _Lai_.

  Hear the tale of Havelok! There was once a good king in England,
  named Athelwold, renowned and beloved for his justice. He had but
  one child, a daughter named Goldborough. Knowing that his end was
  approaching, he sent for all his lords to assemble at Winchester,
  and there committed Goldborough to the care of Godrich, the earl of
  Cornwall; directing him to see her married to the strongest and
  fairest man whom he could find. But Godrich imprisoned her at Dover,
  and resolved to seize her inheritance for his own son. At that time
  there was also a King of Denmark, named Birkabeyn, who had one son,
  Havelok, and two daughters, Swanborough and Helfled. At the approach
  of death, he committed these to the care of Earl Godard. But Godard
  killed the two girls, and only spared Havelok because he did not
  like to kill him with his own hand. He therefore hired a fisherman,
  named Grim, to drown Havelok at sea. But Grim perceived, as Havelok
  slept, a miraculous light shining round the lad, whereby he knew
  that the child was the true heir, and would one day be king. In
  order to avoid Godard, Grim fitted up a ship, and provisioned it,
  and with his wife Leve, his three sons, his two daughters, and
  Havelok, put out to sea. They landed in Lindesey at the month of the
  Humber, at a place afterwards named Grimsby after Grim. Grim worked
  at his old trade, a fisherman’s, and Havelok carried about the fish
  for sale. Then arose a great dearth in the land, and Havelok went
  out to seek his own livelihood, walking to Lincoln barefoot. He was
  hired as a porter by the earl of Cornwall’s cook, and drew water and
  cut wood for the earl’s kitchen. One day some men met to contend in
  games and to “put the stone.” At the cook’s command, Havelok also
  put the stone, hurling it further than any of the rest.[28] Godrich,
  hearing the praises of Havelok’s strength, at once resolved to
  perform his oath by causing him to marry Goldborough; and carried
  his design into execution. As goon as the pair were married, Havelok
  suddenly quitted Lincoln with his wife, and returned to Grimsby,
  where he found that Grim was dead, but that his five children are
  yet alive. At night, Goldborough perceived a light shining round
  about Havelok, and observed a cross upon his shoulder. At the same
  time she heard an angel’s voice, telling her of good fortune to
  come. Then he awoke, and told her a dream; how he had dreamt that
  all Denmark and England became his own. She encouraged him, and
  urged him to set sail for Denmark at once. He accordingly called to
  him Grim’s three sons, and narrated to them his own history, and
  Godard’s treachery, asking them to accompany him to Denmark. To this
  they assented, and sailed with him and Goldborough to Denmark. There
  he sought out a former friend of his father’s, Earl Ubbe, who
  invited him and his friends to a sumptuous feast. After the feast,
  Havelok and Goldborough and Grim’s sons went to the house of one
  Bernard Brown, whose house was that night attacked by sixty thieves.
  By dint of great prowess, the friends at length slew all their sixty
  assailants, and Ubbe was so amazed at Havelok’s valour that he
  resolved to dub him a knight, and invited him to sleep in his own
  castle. At night, he peeped into Havelok’s chamber, and beheld the
  marvellous light, and saw a bright cross on his neck. Rejoiced at
  heart, he did homage to Havelok, and commanded all his friends and
  dependents to do the same. He also dubbed him knight, and proclaimed
  him King. With six thousand men he set out to attack Godard, whom he
  defeated and made prisoner, and afterwards caused to be flayed,
  drawn, and hung. Then Havelok swore that he would establish at
  Grimsby a priory of black monks, to pray for Grim’s soul; and
  Godrich, having heard that Havelok has invaded England, raised a
  great army against him. An indecisive combat took place between Ubbe
  and Godrich, but a more decisive one between Godrich and Havelok;
  for Havelok cut off his foe’s hand and made him prisoner. Then the
  English submitted to Goldborough, and acknowledged her as queen; but
  Godrich was condemned and burnt. Havelok rewarded both his own
  friends and the English nobles; for he caused Earl Reyner of Chester
  to marry Gunild, Grim’s daughter, and Bertram, formerly Godrich’s
  cook, to marry Levive, another of Grim’s daughters; bestowing upon
  Bertram the earldom of Cornwall. Then were Havelok and Goldborough
  crowned at London, and a feast was given that lasted forty days. The
  kingdom of Denmark was bestowed upon Ubbe, who held it of King
  Havelok. Havelok and Goldborough lived to the age of a hundred
  years, and their reign lasted for sixty years in England. They had
  fifteen children, who were all kings and queens. Such is the _geste_
  of Havelok and Goldborough.

    [Footnote 28: Here again is an allusion to “Havelok’s stone.”]


§ 23. POSSIBLE DATE OF HAVELOK’S REIGN.

The various allusions to the story of Havelok already cited naturally
lead us to consider the question as to what date we should refer such
circumstances of the story as may have some foundation in truth, or such
circumstances as may have originated the story. I do not look upon this
as altogether a hopeless or profitless inquiry, for it seems to me that
a theory may be constructed which will readily and easily fit in with
most of the statements of our authorities. In the first place, to place
Havelok’s father in the time of Alfred, as is done by Peter de Langtoft
and his translators, is absurd, and evidently due to the confusion
between the names of Gunter and Godrum or Guthrum. We may even adduce
Langtoft’s evidence against himself, as he alludes to Grimsby as being
the boundary of Egbert’s kingdom; and indeed, the mere fact of its being
a British lay points to a time before the establishment of the
Heptarchy. As already suggested in § 16, some of the authorities point
to the sixth century. But the evidence of the French poem and of Gaimar
points still more steadily to a similar early date. There we find Gunter
appearing as the enemy, not of Alfred, but of Arthur. The French prose
chronicle of the Brute places Adelbright and Edelfi after the death of
Constantine, and it is clear that there is some close connection between
the British lay of Havelok and the British Chronicle. The _Godrich_ of
the English version is the _Alsi_ of the French poem, the _Edelsi_ of
Gaimar, the _Adelfrid_[29] or _Edelfrid_ of the Eulogium Historiarum,
the _Elfroi_ of Wace, the _Æluric_ of Laȝamon, the _Æthelfrith_ who
succeeded to the throne of Northumbria A.D. 593, according to the Saxon
Chronicle. The _Athelwold_ of the English version is the _Adelbrict_ of
Gaimar, the _Ekenbright_ of the French poem, the _Athelbert_ of the
Eulogium Historiarum, the _Aldebar_ of Wace, and the _Æthelbert_ of
Laȝamon, i.e. no other than the celebrated _Æthelberht_ of Kent, who was
baptized by St Augustine A.D. 596, according to the Saxon Chronicle.
This is the right clue to the _names_, from which, when once obtained,
the rest follows easily. The variations between the English and French
versions are very great, and it is clear that each poet proceeded much
as poets are accustomed to do. Taking a legend as the general guide or
thread of a narrative, it is the simplest and easiest plan to dress it
up after one’s own fashion, and to draw upon the materials that are
supplied by the _general surroundings_ of the story. I feel confident
that the narrators of the Lay of Havelok must have used materials not
much unlike those used by Laȝamon, and a mere comparison of the French
and English lays with Laȝamon will amply suffice to elucidate this.
Æluric is first mentioned at p. 195 of vol. iii. of Laȝamon, as edited
by Sir F. Madden; if we allow ourselves a margin on both sides of this,
we may find many things akin to the lay of Havelok between pages 150 and
282 of that volume, as I will now shew. The character of the good king
Athelwold is taken from that of Æthelberht of Kent, and his love of
justice may remind us of the ancient collection of laws which are still
extant as having been made by that king. His extensive rule, such as is
also attributed to Godrich and Havelok, may point to the title of
_Bretwalda_, which Æthelberht so long coveted, and at last obtained. Our
poet, in describing Birkabeyn, repeats this character so exactly, and
makes the circumstances of the deaths of Athelwold and Birkabeyn so
similar, that they are almost indistinguishable; a fault which he
doubles by repeating the character of Godrich in describing that of
Godard. Both of these answer to Laȝamon’s Æluric, who was “the wickedest
of all kings” (Laȝ. iii. 195). So far, perhaps, the connection of the
various stories is not very evident, but I will now mention an obvious
coincidence. The quarrel and reconciliation between Athelbert and
Edelfrid, as told in the Eulogium Historiarum, &c., exactly answers to
the quarrel and reconciliation between Cadwan and Æluric as told in
Laȝamon (vol. iii. p. 205); where Cadwan has come forward in place of
Æthelbert, who has by this time dropped out of Laȝamon’s narrative.
Again, the Gunter or Gurmond who was Havelok’s father reminds us of the
Gurmund of Laȝamon (p. 156), who is curiously described as king of
Africa; but the name is Danish. The character of Grim is fairly
paralleled by that of Brian, who makes sea-voyages, and goes about as a
merchant (Laȝamon, iii. 232). In several respects Havelok may have been
drawn from Cadwalan, whose gallant attempts to gain the king of
Northumberland are recorded in Laȝamon (iii. 216-254); his opponent
being Edwin, who has replaced Ethelfrid as Laȝamon’s narrative proceeds.
At last he overthrows him and slays him in the great battle of
Heathfield or Hatfield, which took place, according to the Saxon
Chronicle, A.D. 633. This great battle resembles the decisive one
between Havelok and Godrich. As Cadwalan was well supported by his
liegeman Penda (Laȝamon, iii. 251), so was Havelok by Ubbe. Again,
Cadwalan marries Helen, whom he found at

    --þan castle of Deoure
  on þere sæ oure; (Laȝamon, iii. 250),

which reminds us of Havelok’s wife Goldborough, who was imprisoned at

            --doure
  þat standeth on þe seis oure; (l. 320).

The very name Helen, though not the name of Havelok’s wife, was that of
his mother, who was killed by the pirates. For the connection between
Laȝamon’s Helen and pirates, see Sir F. Madden’s note, vol. iii. p. 428.
There is a most curious contradiction in the English lay about Havelok’s
religion; in l. 2520 he is a devout Christian, but in l. 2580 Godrich
speaks of him as being a cruel pagan. Now it was just about this very
time that Paulinus preached in Lindsey, “where the first that believed
was a powerful man called _Blecca_, with all his followers” (A.S. Chron.
ed. Thorpe, vol. ii. p. 21; A.D. 627). Havelok, according to some, was
buried at Stonehenge; but so was Constantine (Laȝamon, iii. 151). A
dearth in mentioned in the English lay (l. 824); cf. Laȝamon, iii. 279.
And I may here add another coincidence, of an interesting but certainly
of a very circuitous nature. A close examination of the Lay of King Horn
shews that there is no real connection between the story therein
contained and that of Havelok. Yet there is a connection after a sort.
Though by different authors, and in different metre, both lays are found
in English in the same MS.; both versions belong to the same date; both
are from French versions, written by Englishmen from British sources;
and now, if we compare King Horn with the very part of Laȝamon now under
consideration, there is at once seen to be a most exact resemblance in
one point. The story of the ring given by Horn to Rymenhild (K. Horn,
ed. Lumby, ll. 1026-1210) is remarkably like that of the ring whereby
Brian is recognized by his sister (Laȝamon, iii. 234-238). But it is
hardly worth while to pursue the subject further. It may suffice to
suppose that the period of the existence of Havelok and Grim may be
referred to the times of Æthelberht of Kent and Æthelfrith and Eadwine
of Northumbria.[30] It is exceedingly probable that Havelok was never
more than a chief or a petty prince, and whether he was a Danish or only
a British enemy of the Angles is not of very great importance. If,
however, more exact dates be required, they may be found in “The
Conquest of Britain by the Saxons,” by Daniel P. Haigh, London, 8vo,
1861, pp. 363-367; where the following dates are suggested. Havelok’s
father slain, A.D. 487; his expedition to Denmark, A.D. 507; his reign
in England, A.D. 511-531, or a little later. These dates follow a system
which is here about 16 years earlier than the dates in the A.S.
Chronicle. His results are obtained from totally different
considerations. On the whole, let us place Havelok in the _sixth_
century, at _some_ period of his life.

    [Footnote 29: Hence, by confusion, the placing of Havelok’s
    father in the time of _Ælfred_.]

    [Footnote 30: Or, as I should prefer to say, earlier than those
    times. The two kings spoken of in the Lay may have had names
    somewhat similar to these, which may have been replaced by the
    more familiar names here mentioned.]


§ 24. It is, perhaps, worthy of a passing remark that some of the
circumstances in the Lay may have been suggested by the romantic story
of Eadwine of Northumbria, who was also born at the close of the sixth
century. For he it was who really married the _daughter of Æthelberht_,
and it was the _archbishop of York_, Paulinus, who performed the
ceremony. The relation of how Eadwine was persecuted by _Æthelfrith_,
how he fled and was protected by Rædwald, king of the East Angles, how
he saw a vision of an angel who promised his restoration to the throne
and that his rule should exceed that of his predecessors, how, with the
assistance of Rædwald, he overthrew and _slew Æthelfrith_ in a terrible
battle beside the river Idle, may be found in Beda’s Ecclesiastical
History, bk. II. ch. 9-16.[31] In the last of these chapters there is
again mention of _Blecca, the governor of the city of Lincoln_. Sir F.
Madden, in his note to l. 45, speaks of the extraordinary proofs of the
peaceable state of the country in the reign of Ælfred; but Beda uses
similar language in speaking of the reign of Eadwine; and the earlier
instance is even more remarkable. “It is reported that there was then
such perfect peace in Britain, wheresoever the dominion of King Edwin
extended, that, as _is still proverbially said_, a woman with her
new-born babe might walk throughout the island, from sea to sea, without
receiving any harm. That king took such care for the good of his nation,
that in several places where he had seen clear springs near the
highways, he caused stakes to be fixed, with brass dishes hanging at
them, for the conveniency of travellers; nor durst any man touch them
for any other purpose than that for which they were designed, either
through the dread they had of the king, or for the affection which they
bore him, &c.”[32] Readers who are acquainted with the pleasing poem of
“Edwin of Deira,” by the late Alexander Smith, will remember his
adventures; and it may be noted, as an instance of the manner in which
poets alter names at pleasure, that Mr Smith gives to Æthelfrith the
name of Ethelbert, to Eadwine’s wife Æthelburh, that of Bertha, and to
his father Ælle, that of Egbert. My theory of the Lay of Havelok is then
simply this, that I look upon it as the general result of various
narratives connected with the history of Northumbria and Lindesey at the
close, or possibly the beginning, of the sixth century, gathered round
some favourite local (i.e. Lincolnshire) tradition as a nucleus. A
similar theory may be true of the Lay of Horn.

    [Footnote 31: Cf. Lappenberg’s History of England, tr. by
    Thorpe, vol. i. pp. 145-154.]

    [Footnote 32: See the same statement in Fabyan’s Chronicles,
    p. 112; ed. Ellis, 1811.]


§ 25. ON THE NAMES “CURAN” AND “HAVELOK.”

The French version tells us that _Coaran_, _Cuaran_, or _Cuheran_ is the
British word for a scullion. This etymology has not hitherto been
traced, but it may easily have been perfectly true. A glance at
Armstrong’s Gaelic Dictionary shews us that the Gaelic _cearn_ (which
answers very well to the Old English _hirne_, a corner) has the meaning
of a _corner_, and, secondly, of a _kitchen_; and that _cearnach_ is an
adjective meaning _of or belonging to a kitchen_. But we may come even
nearer than this; for by adding the diminutive ending _-an_ to the
Gaelic _cocaire_, a cook, we see that _Cuheran_ may really have conveyed
the idea of _scullion_ to a British ear, and this probably further gave
rise to the story of Havelok’s degradation. It is a common custom--one
which true etymologists must always deplore--to invent a story to
account for a derivation; and such a practice is invariably carried out
with greater boldness and to a greater extent if the said derivation
chances to be false. For it is possible that Curan may be simply the
Gaelic _curan_, a brave man, and the Irish _curanta_, brave. The
derivation of Havelok is certainly puzzling. Professor Rask declared it
to have no meaning in Danish. It bears, however, a remarkable
resemblance to the Old English _gavelok_, which occurs in Weber’s _Kyng
Alisaunder_, l. 1620, and which is the A.S. _gafeluc_, Icel. _gaflak_,
Welsh _gaflach_, a spear, dart, or javelin. This is an appropriate name
for a warrior, and possibly reappears in the instance of Hugh
_Kevelock_, earl of Chester (Bp. Percy’s Folio MS., ed. Hales and
Furnivall, i. 128). It is remarkable that the Gaelic and Irish _corran_
has the same sense, that of _a spear_, whilst _curan_, as
above-mentioned, means _a brave man_. It is best, perhaps, to stop here;
for etymology, when pursued too far, is wont to beguile the pursuer into
every possible quagmire of absurdity.


§ 26. DESCRIPTION OF THE MS., &c.

The MS. from which the present poem is printed is in the Laudian
collection in the Bodleian Library, where its old mark is K 60, and its
present one Misc. 108. Being described in the old printed catalogue
merely as _Vitæ Sanctorum_, the romance was in consequence for a long
time overlooked. The Lives of the Saints occupy a large portion of the
volume, and are probably to be ascribed to the authorship of Robert of
Gloucester. “These Lives or Festivals,” says Sir F. Madden, “are [here]
61 in number, written in long Alexandrine verse. Then succeed the
Sayings of St Bernard and the Visions of St Paul, both in six-line
stanzas; the _Disputatio inter Corpus et Animam_, the English Romance of
Havelok, the Romance of Kyng Horn, and some additions in a hand of the
15th century, including the lives of St Blaise, St Cecilia, and St
Alexius, and an alliterative poem intitled _Somer Soneday_, making in
all the Contents of the Volume to amount to 70 pieces.” The lays of
Havelok and Horn are written out in the same handwriting, of an early
date, certainly not later than the end of the thirteenth century. The
Havelok begins on fol. 204, and is written in double columns, each
column containing 45 lines. A folio is lost between fol. 211 and 212,
but no notice of this has been taken in numbering the folios; hence the
catchword which should have been found at the bottom of fol. 215 _b_,
appears at the bottom of fol. 214 _b_ (see l. 2164). The poem terminates
at the 27th line on fol. 219 _b_, and is immediately followed by Kyng
Horn in the same column. The character of the handwriting is bold and
square, but the words are very close together. The initial letter of
every line is written a little way apart from the rest, as in William of
Palerne, and other MSS. Both the long and short _s_ (ſ _and_ s) are
used. The long _s_ is in general well distinguished from _f_, and on
this account I have taken the liberty of printing both _esses_ alike, as
my experience in printing the Romans of Partenay proved that the
difficulty of avoiding misprints is greater than the gain of
representing the difference between them. The chief point of interest is
that, as in _early_ MSS., the long _s_ is sometimes found at the _end_
of a word, as in “uſ” in l. 22, and “iſ” in l. 23. The following are all
the examples of the use of this letter in the first 26 lines; ſo (4),
wicteſte (9), ſtede (10), criſt, ſchilde (16), Kriſt, ſo (17), ſo (19),
ſchal (21), Kriſt, uſ (22), iſ (23), ſtalworþi (24), ſtalworþeſte (25),
ſtede (26). With this exception, the present reprint is a faithful
representation of the original; for, as the exact fidelity of a text is
of the first importance, I have been careful to compare the proof-sheets
with the MS. twice throughout; besides which, the original edition is
itself exceedingly correct, and had been re-read by Sir F. Madden with
the MS. His list of errata (nearly all of them of minor importance)
agreed almost exactly with my own. A great difficulty is caused by the
use of the Saxon letter _w_ (ƿ). This letter, the thorn-letter (þ), and
_y_, are all three made very nearly alike. In general, the _y_ is
dotted, but the dot is occasionally omitted. Wherever the letter really
appears to be a _w_, I have denoted it by printing the _w_ as an italic
letter. The following are, I believe, the _only_ examples of it.
_W_it-drow = withdrew, l. 502; _w_e, 1058; _w_as, 1129 (cf. “him was ful
wa,” _Sir Tristr._ f. iii. st. 43); ber_w_en, 1426 (written “berwen” in
l. 697); _w_at = known, 1674; _w_e, miswritten for _w_o = who, 1914; to
which perhaps we may add _w_it, 997. This evidence is interesting as
shewing that this letter was then fast going out of use, and I think
that we may safely date the final disappearance of this letter from MSS.
at about the year 1300. As regards the _th_, we may remark that at the
end of a word both þ and _th_ are used, as in “norþ and suth,” l. 434;
sometimes _th_ occurs in the middle of a word, as “sithen,” l. 1238,
which is commonly written “siþen,” as in l. 399. The words þe, þat, þer,
&c., are hardly ever written otherwise. But the reader will remark many
instances in which _th_ final seems to have the hard sound of _t_, as in
_brouth_, 57, _nouth_, 58, _lith_, 534, _þouth_, 1190, &c.; cf. § 27.
The letter _t_ is sometimes shortened so as nearly to resemble _c_, and
_c_ is sometimes lengthened into _t_. The letters _n_ and _u_ are
occasionally alike, but the difference between them is commonly well
marked. The _i_ has a long stroke over it when written next to _m_ or
_n_. On the whole, the writing is very clear and distinct, after a
slight acquaintance with it. The poem is marked out into paragraphs by
the use of large letters. I have introduced a slight space at the end of
each paragraph, to shew this more clearly.


§ 27. ON THE GRAMMATICAL FORMS OCCURRING IN THE POEM.

The following peculiarities of spelling may be first noted. We
frequently find _h_ prefixed to words which it is usual to spell without
one. Examples are: _holde_ for _old_, _hete_ for _ete_ (eat), _het_ for
_et_ (ate), _heuere_ for _euere_, _Henglishe_ for _Englishe_, &c.; see
the Glossary, under the letter H. This enables us to explain some words
which at first appear puzzling; thus _her_ = _er_, ere; _hayse_ =
_ayse_, ease; _helde_ = _elde_, old age; _hore_ = _ore_, grace; _hende_
= _ende_, which in one passage means _end_, but in another _a duck_. The
forms _hof_, _hus_, _hure_, for _of_, _us_, _ure_ are such as we should
hardly have expected to find. On the other hand, _h_ is omitted in the
words _auelok_, _aueden_, _osed_, and in _is_ for _his_ (l. 2254). These
instances, and other examples such as follow, may readily be found by
help of the Glossarial Index. Again, _d_ final after _l_ or _n_ was so
slightly sounded as to be omitted even in writing. Examples are: _lon_
for _lond_, _hel_ for _held_, _bihel_ for _biheld_, _shel_ for _sheld_,
_gol_ for _gold_. But a more extraordinary omission is that of _r_ final
in _the_, _neythe_, _othe_, _douthe_, which does not seem to be
satisfactorily explained even by the supposition that the scribe may
have omitted the small upward curl which does duty for _er_ so
frequently in MSS. For we further find the omission of _l_ final, as in
_mike_ for _mikel_, _we_ for _wel_, and of _t_ final, as in _bes_ for
_best_; from which instances we should rather infer some peculiarity of
pronunciation rendering final letters indistinct, of which there are
numerous examples, as _fiel_ for _field_, in modern provincial English.
Cf. _il_ for _ilk_, in ll. 818, 1740; and _twel_ for _twelf_. “From the
same license,” says Sir F. Madden, “arises the frequent repetition of
such rhythm as _riden_ and _side_, where the final _n_ seems to have
been suppressed in pronunciation. Cf. ll. 29, 254, 957, 1105, 1183,
2098, &c, and hence we perceive how readily the infinitive verbal Saxon
termination glided into its subsequent form. The broad pronunciation of
the dialect in which the poem was written is also frequently
discernible, as in _slawen_, l. 2676, and _knaue_, l. 949, which rhyme
to _Rauen_ and _plawe_.[33] So likewise, _bothe_ or _bethe_ is, in
sound, equivalent to _rede_, ll. 360, 694, 1680.” Other peculiarities
will be noticed in discussing the Metre. Observe also the Anglo-Saxon
_hw_ for the modern _wh_, exemplified by _hwo_, 368, _hwan_, 474,
_hweþer_, 294, _hwere_, 549, _hwil_, 301; compare also _qual_, _qui_,
_quan_, meaning _whale_, _why_, _when_.[34] The letter _w_ (initial) is
the modern provincial _’oo_, as in _wlf_, _wluine_, _wman_; cf. _hw_,
_w_, both forms of _how_; and _lowerd_ for _louerd_. In particular, we
should notice the hard sound of _t_ denoted by _th_ in the words _with_,
_rithe_, _brouth_, _nouth_, _ricth_, _knicth_, meaning _white_, _right_,
_brought_, _naught_, _right_, _knight_; so too _douther_, daughter,
_neth_, a net, _uth_, out, _woth_, wot, _leth_, let, _lauthe_
(_laught_), caught, _nither-tale_ (_nighter-tale_), night-time.[35] On
the other hand, _t_ stands for _th_ in _hauet_, 564, _seyt_, 647,
_herknet_, 1, _wit_, 100. When _th_ answers to the modern sound, it
seems equivalent to A.S. ð rather than to A.S. þ; examples are _mouth_,
433, _oth_, 260, _loth_, 261. _Y_ and _g_ are interchangeable, as in
_yaf_, _gaf_, _youen_, _gouen_; _g_ even occurs for _k_, as in _rang_,
2561. In MSS., _e_ is not uncommonly written by mistake for _o_; this
may perhaps account for _helde_, 2472, _meste_, 233, _her_, 1924, which
should rather be _holde_, 30, _moste_, and _hor_, 235; there is a like
confusion of _weren_ and _woren_; and perhaps _grotinde_ should be
_gretinde_.[36] The vowel _u_ is replaced by the modern _ou_ in the
words _prud_, 302, _suth_, 434, _but_, 1040, _hus_, 740, _spusen_, 1123;
cf. _hws_ in l. 1141. Mr Ellis shews, in his Early English
Pronunciation, chap. v, that in pure specimens of the _thirteenth_
century, there is no _ou_ in such words, and in the _fourteenth_
century, no simple _u_. This furnishes a ready explanation of the
otherwise difficult _sure_, in l. 2005; it is merely the adverb of
_sour_, _sourly_ being used in the sense of _bitterly_; to _bye it
bitterly_, or _bye it bittre_, is a common phrase in Piers Plowman.
Other spellings worth notice occur in _ouerga_, 314, _stra_, 315 (spelt
_strie_ in l. 998), _hawe_, 1188, _plawe_, 950, _sal_, 628 (commonly
spelt _shal_). Note also _arum_ for _arm_, _harum_ for _harm_, _boren_
for _born_, 1878, and _koren_ for _corn_, 1879. There are several
instances of words joined together, as _haui_, 2002, _biddi_, 484;
_shaltu_, 2186, _wiltu_, 905, _wenestu_, 1787; _wilte_, 528,
_thenkeste_, 578, _shaltou_, 1800; _thouthe_, 790, _hauedet_, _youenet_,
_hauenet_; _sawe_, 338; _latus_, 1772; where the personal pronouns _i_,
_þu_, _he_, _it_, _we_, _us_ are added to the verb. Hence, in l. 745, it
is very likely that _calleth_ is written for _callet_, i.e. call it; and
on the same principle we can explain _dones_; see _Es_ in the Glossary.
In like manner _goddot_ is contracted from _God wot_; and _þerl_ from
_þe erl_.

_Nouns._ As regards the nouns employed, I may remark that the final _e_
is perhaps always sounded in the oblique cases, and especially in the
dative case; as in _nedè_, _stedè_, &c. (see ll. 86-105), _willè_, 85,
_gyuè_, 357, _blissè_, 2187, _cricè_, 2450; cf. the adjectives _longè_,
2299, _wisè_, 1713; also the nominatives _rosè_, 2919, _newè_, 2974.
_Frend_ is a pl. form; cf. _hend_, which is both a plural (2444) and a
dat. sing. (505). In the plural, the final _e_ is fully pronounced in
the adjectives _allè_, 2, _hardè_, 143, _starkè_, 1015, _fremdè_, 2277,
_bleikè_, 470, and in many others; cf. the full form _boþen_, 2223. Not
only does the phrase _none kines_, of no kind, occur in ll. 861, 1140,
but we find the unusual phrase _neuere kines_, of never a kind, in
l. 2691. Among the numerals, we find not only _þre_, but _þrinne_.

_Pronouns._ The first personal pronoun occurs in many forms in the
nominative, as _i_, _y_, _hi_, _ich_, _ic_, _hic_, and even _ihc_; the
oblique cases take the form _me_. For the second person, we have _þu_,
_þou_, in the nominative, and also _tu_, when preceded by _þat_, as in
l. 2903. We may notice also _hijs_ for _his_, l. 47; _he_ for _they_;
_sho_, 112, _scho_, 126, _sche_, 1721, for _she_; and, in particular,
the dual form _unker_, of you two, 1882. The most noteworthy possessive
pronouns are _minè_, pl. 1365, _þinè_, pl. 620; _his_ or _hise_, pl.
_hisè_, 34; _ure_, 606; _youres_, 2800; _hirè_, 2918, with which cf. the
dat. sing. _hirè_ of the personal pronoun, 85, 300. _þis_ is plural, and
means _these_, in l. 1145. As in other old English works, _men_ is
frequently an impersonal pronoun, answering to the French _on_, and is
followed by a singular verb; as in _men ringes_, 390, _men seyt and
suereth_, 647, _men fetes_, 2341, _men nam_, 900, _men birþe_, 2101,
_men dos_, 2434; cf. _folk sau_, 2410; but there are a few instances of
its use with a plural verb, as _men haueden_, 901, _men shulen_, 747.
The former is the more usual construction.

_Verbs._ The infinitives of verbs rarely have _y-_ prefixed; two
examples are _y-lere_, 12, _y-se_, 334. Nor is the same prefix common
before past participles; yet we find _i-gret_, 163, _i-groten_, 285, and
_i-maked_, 5, as well as _maked_, 23. Infinitives end commonly in _-en_
or _-e_, as _riden_, 26, _y-lere_; also in _-n_, as _don_, 117, _leyn_,
718; and even in _-o_, as _flo_, 612, _slo_, 1364. The present singular,
3rd person, of the indicative, ends both in _-es_ or _-s_, and _-eth_ or
_-th_, the former being the more usual. Examples are _longes_, 396,
_leues_, 1781, _haldes_, 1382, _fedes_, 1693, _bes_, 1744, _comes_,
1767, _glides_, 1851, _þarnes_, 1913, _haues_, 1952, _etes_, 2036,
_dos_, 1913; also _eteth_, 672, _haueth_, 804, _bikenneth_, 1269,
_doth_, 1876, _liþ_, 673. The full form of the 2nd person is _-est_, as
_louest_, 1663; but it is commonly cut down to _-es_, as _weldes_, 1359,
_slepes_, 1283, _haues_, 688, _etes_, 907, _getes_, 908; cf. _dos_,
2390, _mis-gos_, 2707, _slos_, 2706. The same dropping of the _t_ is
observable in the past tense, as in _reftes_, 2394, _feddes and
claddes_, 2907. Still more curious is the ending in _t_ only, as in _þu
bi-hetet_, 677, _þou mait_, 689; cf. ll. 852, 1348. In the subjunctive
mood the _-st_ disappears as in Anglo-Saxon, and hence the forms _bute
þou gonge_, 690, _þat þu fonge_, 856, &c.; cf. _bede_, 668. In the 3rd
person, present tense, of the same mood, we have the _-e_ fully
pronounced, as in _shildè_, 16, _yeuè_, 22, _leuè_, 334, _redè_, 687;
and in l. 544, _wreken_ should undoubtedly be _wrekè_, since the _-en_
belongs to the plural, as in _moten_, 18. The plural of the indicative
present ends in _-en_, as, _we hauen_, 2798, _ye witen_, 2208, _þei
taken_, 1833; or, very rarely, in _-eth_, as _ye bringeth_, 2425, _he_
(they) _strangleth_, 2584. Sometimes the final _-n_ is lost, as in _we
haue_, 2799, _ye do_, 2418, _he_ (they) _brenne_, 2583. There is even a
trace of the plural in _-es_, as in _haues_, 2581. The _present_ tense
has often a _future_ signification, as in _etes_, 907, _eteth_, 672,
_getes_, 908.

_Past tense._ Of the third person singular and plural of the past tense
the following are selected examples. WEAK VERBS: _hauede_, 770,
_sparedè_, 898, _yemedè_, 975, _semedè_, 976, _sparkëdè_, 2144,
_þankedè_, 2189; pl. _loueden_, 955, _leykeden_, 954, _woundeden_, 2429,
_stareden_, 1037, _yemede_ (rather read _yemeden_), 2277, _makeden_,
554, _sprauleden_, 475; also _calde_, 2115, _gredde_, 2417, _herde_,
2410, _kepte_, 879, _fedde_, 786, _ledde_, 785, _spedde_, 756, _clapte_,
1814, _kiste_, 1279; pl. _herden_, _brenden_, 594, _kisten_, 2162,
_ledden_, 1246; and, thirdly, of the class which change the vowel,
_aute_, 743, _laute_, 744, _bitauhte_, 2212. Compare the past
participles _osed_, 971, _mixed_, 2533, _parred_, 2439, _gadred_, 2577;
_reft_, 1367, _wend_, 2138, _hyd_, 1059; _told_, 1036, _sold_, 1638,
_wrouth_ = _wrout_, 1352. There are also at least two past participles
in _-et_, as _slenget_, 1923, _grethet_, 2615, to which add _weddeth_,
_beddeth_, 1127, In l. 2057, _knawed_ seems put for _knawen_, for the
rime’s sake.

STRONG VERBS: third person singular, past tense, _bar_, 815, _bad_,
1415, _yaf_, or _gaf_, _spak_; _kam_, 766 (spelt _cham_, 1873), _nam_,
_kneu_, _hew_, 2729, _lep_, 1777, _let_, 2447 (spelt _leth_, 2651),
_slep_, 1280, _wex_, 281: _drou_, 705, _for_, 2943, _low_, 903, _slow_,
1807, _hof_, 2750, _stod_, 986, _tok_; 751, _wok_, 2093; pl. _beden_,
2774, _youen_, or _gouen_; _comen_, 1017 (spelt _keme_, 1208), _nomen_,
2790 (spelt _neme_, 1207), _knewen_, 2149, _lopen_, 1896, _slepen_,
2128; _drowen_, 1837, _foren_, 2380, _lowen_, 1056, _slowen_, 2414, &c.
And secondly, of the class which more usually change the vowel in the
_plural_ of the preterite, we find the singular forms _bigan_, 1357,
_barw_, 2022, _karf_, 471, _swank_, 788, _warp_, 1061, _shon_, 2144,
_clef_, 2643, _sau_, 2409, _grop_, 1965, _drof_, 725, _shof_, 892; pl.
_bigunnen_, 1011, _sowen_, 1055, _gripen_, 1790, _driue_, for _driuen_,
1966; also _bunden_, 2436, _scuten_, 2431 (spelt _schoten_, 1864,
_shoten_, 1838), _leyen_, 2132, &c. Compare the past participles
_boren_, 1878, _youen_ or _gouen_, _cumen_, 1436, _nomen_, 2265 (spelt
_numen_, 2581), _laten_, 1925, _waxen_, 302, _drawen_, 1925, _slawen_,
2000, which two last become _drawe_, _slawe_ in ll. 1802, 1803.

We should also observe the past tenses _spen_, 1819, _stirt_, 812,
_fauth_ for _faut_ or _fauht_, 1990, _citte_, 942, _bere_, 974, _kipte_,
1050, _flow_, 2502, _plat_, 2755; and the past participles _demd_ for
_demed_, 2488, _giue_ for _giuen_, 2488, _henged_, 1429, _keft_, 2005.

_Imperative Mood._ Examples of the imperative mood singular, 2nd person,
are _et_, _sit_, 925, _nim_, 1336, _yif_, 674; in the plural, the usual
ending is _-es_, as in _liþes_, 2204, _comes_, 1798, _folwes_, 1885,
_lokes_, 2292, _bes_, 2246, to which set belong _slos_, 2596, _dos_,
2592; but there are instances of the ending _-eth_ also, as in _cometh_,
1885, _yeueþ_, 911, to which add _doth_, 2037, _goth_, 1780. Indeed both
forms occur in one line, as in _Cometh swiþe, and folwes me_ (1885).
Instead of _-eth_ we even find _-et_, as in _herknet_, 1. These
variations afford a good illustration of the unsettled state of the
grammar in some parts of England at this period; we need not suppose the
scribe to be at fault in all cases where there is a want of uniformity.

Of reflexive verbs, we meet with _me dremede_, 1284, _me met_, 1285, _me
þinkes_, 2169, _him hungrede_, 654, _him semede_, 1652, _him stondes_,
2983, _him rewede_, 503. The present participles end most commonly in
_-inde_, as _fastinde_, 865, _grotinde_ (? _gretinde_), 1390,
_lauhwinde_, 946, _plattinde_, 2282, _starinde_, 508; but we also find
_gangande_, 2283, _driuende_, 2702. Compare the nouns _tiþande_, 2279,
_offrende_, 1386, which are Norse forms, _tíðindi_ (pl.) being the
Icelandic for _tidings_, and _offrandi_ the present participle of
_offra_, to offer. But the true Icelandic equivalent of the substantive
_an offering_ is _offran_, and the old Swedish is _offer_; and hence we
see at how very early a date the confusion between the noun-ending and
the ending of the present participle arose; a confusion which has
bewildered many generations of Englishmen. Yet this very poem in other
places has _-ing_ as a noun-ending _only_, never (that I remember) for
the present participle. Examples of it are _greting_, 166, _dreping_,
i.e. slaughter, 2684, _buttinge_, _skirming_, _wrastling_, _putting_,
_harping_, _piping_, _reding_; see ll. 2322-2327. Such words are
frequently called _verbal nouns_, but the term is very likely to
mislead. I have found that many suppose it to imply _present participles
used as nouns_, instead of _nouns of verbal derivation_. If such nouns
could be called by some new name, such as _nouns of action_, or by any
other title that can be conventionally restricted to signify them, it
would, I think, be a gain. Amongst the auxiliary verbs, may be noted the
use of _cone_, 622, as the subjunctive form of _canst_; _we mone_, 840,
as the subjunctive of _mowen_; cf. _ye mowen_, 11; but especially we
should observe the use of the comparatively rare verbs _birþe_, it
behoves, pt. t. _birde_, it behoved, and _þurte_, he need, the latter of
which is fully explained in the Glossary to William of Palerne, s.v.
_þort_.

The prefix _to-_ is employed in _both_ senses, as explained in the same
Glossary, s.v. _To-_. In _to-brised_, _to-deyle_, &c., it is equivalent
to the German _zer-_ and Mœso-Gothic _dis-_; of its _other_ and _rarer_
use, wherein it answers to the German _zu-_ and Mœso-Gothic _du-_, there
is but _one_ instance, viz. in the word _to-yede_, 765, which signifies
_went to_; cf. Germ. _zugehen_, to go to, _zugang_ (A.S. _to-gang_),
access, approach. There are some curious instances of a peculiar syntax,
whereby the infinitive mood active partakes of a passive signification,
as in _he made him kesten, and in feteres festen_, he caused him to be
cast in prison (_or perhaps_, overthrown), and to be fastened in
fetters; l. 81. But it is probable that this is to be explained by
considering it as a phrase in which we should _now_ supply the word
_men_, and that we may interpret it by “he caused [men] to cast him in
prison, and to fasten him with fetters;” for in ll. 1784, 1785, the
phrase is repeated in a less ambiguous form. See also l. 86. So also, in
ll. 2611, 2612, I consider _keste_, _late_, _sette_, to be in the
infinitive mood. Such a construction is at once understood by comparing
it with the German _er liess ihn binden_, he caused him to be bound. In
l. 2352, appears the most unusual form _ilker_, which is literally _of
each_, and hence, _apiece_; cf. _unker_, which also is a genitive
plural. It will be observed that the verb following is in the plural,
the real nominative to it being _þei þre_. In l. 2404, the expression
_þat þer þrette_, “that there threat,” recalls a colloquialism which is
still common. The word _þrie_, 730, is, apparently, the O.E. adverb
_thrie_, thrice; _liues_, 509, is an adverb ending in _-es_, originally
a genitive case. _Þus-gate_ is, according to Mr Morris, unknown to the
Southern dialect; it occurs in ll. 785, 2419, 2586. I may add that
Havelok contains as many as five expressions, which seem to refer to
_proverbs_ current at the time of writing it. See ll. 307, 648, 1338,
1352, 2461.

    [Footnote 33: “Cf. K. Horn, 1005, where _haue_ rhymes with
    plawe.” --M. Mr A. J. Ellis would consider _slawen_, _knaue_, &c.,
    as assonances-- “Do not think of the pronunciation of modern
    _drawen_. Read _sla-wen_, _kna-ue_, an assonance. _Beþe_ does
    _not_ rhyme to _reden_; it is only an assonance.” --Ellis. On the
    other hand, we find the spellings _rathe_, _rothe_ instead of
    _rede_ in ll. 1335 and 2817.]

    [Footnote 34: “_Qual_ = _quhal_, the aspirate being omitted; and
    _quhal_ = _whal_.” --Ellis.]

    [Footnote 35: The use of _th_ for _t_ is not uncommon. In the
    _Romans of Partenay_, we have _thown_, _thaken_, _thouchyng_, &c.,
    for _town_, _taken_, _touching_; see Preface, p. xvi. In the copy
    of Piers Plowman in MS. Camb. Univ. Lib. Dd l. 17, I have observed
    several similar examples. Cf. Eng. _tea_, Ital. _tè_, Span. _té_,
    with Fr. _thé_, Swed. _the_, G. Du. Dan. _thee_.]

    [Footnote 36: “Is _e_ for _o_ a mistake, or may it be compared
    with _preue_ for _prove_, &c.?” --Ellis. I would observe that
    _greting_ is the spelling of the _substantive_ in l. 166.]


§ 28. ON THE METRE OF HAVELOK.

The poem is written in the familiar rhythm of which I have already
spoken elsewhere, viz. at p. xxxvii of the Preface to Mr Morris’s
edition of Genesis and Exodus. The metre of Havelok is rather more
regular, but many of the remarks there made apply to it. The chief rule
is that every line shall contain four accents,[37] the two principal
types being afforded (1) by the eight-syllable and nine-syllable lines--

  (_a_) For hém | ne yé|dë góld | ne fé, 44;
  (_b_) It wás | a kíng | bi á|rë dáwës, 27;

and (2) by the seven-syllable and eight-syllable lines--

  (_c_) Hérk|net tó | me gó|dë men, 1;
  (_d_) Al|lë thát | he mícth|ë fyndë, 42.

To one of these four forms every line can be reduced, by the use of that
slighter utterance of less important syllables which is so very common
in English poetry. It is not the number of _syllables_, but of
_accents_, that is essential. In _every_ line throughout the poem there
are four accents, with only two or three exceptions, viz. ll. 1112,
1678, &c, which are defective. In a similar manner, we may readily scan
any of the lines, as e.g. ll. 2-4;

  (_c_) Wi|uës, mayd|nës, and al|lë men
  (_b_) Of a ta|lë þat | ich you | wile tellë[38]
  (_b_) Wo-so | ’t wil’ her’ | and þer|to duellë, &c.

Here the syllables _-nes and_ in l. 3, _of a_ in l. 4, and _it wile_ in
l. 5, are so rapidly pronounced as to occupy only the room of one
unaccented syllable in lines of the strict type. However awkward this
appears to be in theory, it is very easy in practice, as the reciter
readily manages his voice so as to produce the right rhythmical effect;
and, indeed, this variation of arrangement is a real improvement,
preventing the recitation from becoming monotonous. Those who have a
good ear for rhythm will readily understand this, and it seems
unnecessary to dwell upon it more at length. But it may be remarked,
that the three lines above quoted are rather _more irregular than
usual_, and that the metre is such as to enable us to fix the instances
in which the final _-e_ is pronounced with great accuracy, on which
account I shall say more about this presently. I would, however, first
enumerate the rimes which seem to be more or less inexact or peculiar,
or otherwise instructive.

I. _Repetitions._ Such are _men, men_; _holden, holde_, 29;[39] _erþe,
erþe_, 739; _heren, heren_, 1640; _nithes, knithes_, 2048; _youres,
youres_, 2800. To this class belong also _longe, londe_, 172, _heye,
heie_, 1151, 2544; where _longe, londe_ is, however, only an assonance.

II. _Assonant rimes._ Here the rime is in the vowel-sound; the
consonantal endings differ. Such are _rym, fyn_, 21; _yeme, quene_, 182;
_shop, hok_, 1101 (where _shop_ is probably corrupt); _odrat, bad_,
1153; _fet, ek_, 1303; _yer, del_, 1333; _maked, shaped_, 1646; _beþe,
rede_, 1680; _riche, chinche_, 1763, 2940; _feld, swerd_, 1824, 2634;
_seruede, werewed_, 1914; _wend, gent_, 2138; _þank, rang_, 2560;
_boþen, ut-drowen_, 2658. To the same class belong _name_, _rauen_,
1397, _grauen, name_, 2528; _slawen, rauen_, 2676. _Henged, slenget_,
1922, should rather be called an imperfect rime.[40] There is also found
the exact opposite to this, viz., an agreement or _consonance_ at the
end, preceded by an apparent diversity in the vowel; as _longe, gange_,
795 (but see _longe, gonge_, 843), _bidde, stede_, 2548, _open, drepen_,
1782, _gres, is_, 2698, _boþe, rathe_, 2936 (but see _rathe, bathe_,
1335, 2542), _fet_ (long _e_), _gret_, 2158; and not unlike these are
some instances of loose rimes, as _beþe, rede_, 360, _knaue, plawe_,
949, _sawe, hawe_ (where _hawe_ is written for _haue_), 1187, _sawe,
wowe_, 1962 (but see _wowe, lowe_, 2078, _lowe, sawe_, 2142, _wawe,
lowe_, 2470). Observe also _bouth, oft_ (read _vt_ or _ut_ = _out_?),
883, _tun, barun_, 1001 (cf. _toun, brun_, 1750, _champiouns, barouns_,
1032); _plattinde, gangande_, 2282, &c. _Eir, toþer_, 410, _harde,
crakede_, 567, are probably due to mistakes.[41]

III. Rimes which shew that the final _-en_ was pronounced so slightly as
to be nearly equivalent to _-e_. Examples: _holden, holde_, 29; _gongen,
fonge_, 855; _bringe, ringen_, 1105; _mouthen, douthe_, 1183; _riden,
side_, 1758; _wesseylen, to-deyle_, 2098; _slawen, drawe_, 2476. In the
same way _hon_ rimes to _lond_, 1341, owing to the slight pronunciation
of the final _d_.[42]

IV. Rimes which appear imperfect, but may be perfect. _Riche_ answers to
_like_, 132, but the true spelling is _rike_, answering to _sike_, 290.
_Mithe_, 196, should probably be _moucte_, as in l. 257, and it would
thus rime with _þoucte_. _Blinne_, 2670, should certainly be _blunne_;
cf. A.S. _blinnan_, pt. t. s. _ic blan_, pt. t. pl. _we blunnon_; and
thus it rimes to _sunne_. _Misdede_, 993, is clearly an error for
_misseyde_, as appears from the parallel passage in ll. 49, 50; and it
then rimes with _leyde_. So in l. 1736, for _deled_ read _deyled_, as in
l. 2098. _Boþe_, 430, has no line answering to it, and a line may have
been lost. _Nicth, lict_, 575, is a perfect rime. _Halde, bolde_, 2308,
may also be perfect. _For-sworen_ answers to _for-lorn_ (pronounced
_for-loren_), 1423; _bitawte_ to _authe_ (pronounced _aute_), 1409;
_yemede_ (pronounced _yem-dè_) is not an improper rime to _fremde_,
2276; _anon_ rimes with _iohan_ (if pronounced _ion_ or _John_, as
indicated by the spelling _ion_ in l. 177), 2562, 2956. Yet in another
instance it seems to be two syllables, _Jo-han_; see _wimman, iohan_,
1720.[43] Speche should be _speke_, and thus rimes to _meke_, 1065.
_Stareden_ should perhaps be _stradden_, or some such form, rightly
riming to _ladden_, 1037. Under this head we may notice some rimes which
throw, possibly, some light on the pronunciation. Thus, for the sound of
_ey, ei_, observe _hayse, preyse_, 60; _leyke, bleike_, 469; _laumprei,
wei_, 771; _deye_ rimes to _preye_, 168; _day_ to _wey_, 663; _seyd_ to
_brayd_, 1281; but we also find _hey, fri_, 1071; _hey, sley_, 1083,
_heye, heie_, 1151; _heye, eie_, 2544; _leye, heye_, 2010; _heye,
fleye_, 2750. _Fram_ rimes to _sham_, 55; yet the latter word is really
_shame_, 83; _gange_ is also spelt _gonge_, _halde_ rimes with _bolde_,
2308. The pronunciation of _ware_, _were_, or _wore_, seems ambiguous;
we find _sore, wore_, 236; _wore, more_, 258; _ware, sare_, 400; _wore,
sore_, 414; _were, þere_, 741; _more, þore_, 921. For the sound of _e_,
observe _suere, gere_, 388; _suereth, dereth_, 648; _eten, geten_, 930;
_yet, fet_, 1319; _stem, bem_, 592; _glem, bem_, 2122; also _yeue,
liue_, 198; _liue, gyue_, 356; _lyue, yeue_, 1217; _her, ther_, 1924;
_fishere, swere_, 2230. For that of _i_, observe _cri, merci_, 270;
_sire, swire_, 310; _swiþe, vnbliþe_, 140; _fir, shir_, 587; _sire,
hire_, 909; _rise, bise_, 723; _fyr, shir_, 915; _lye, strie_, 997;
_hey, fri_, 1071; _for-þi, merci_, 2500. For that of _o_, observe _two,
so_, 350; _do, so_, 713; _shon, on_, 969; _hom, grom_, 789; _lode,
brode_, 895; _anon, ston_, 927; _ston, won_, 1023; _do, sho_ (shoe),
1137; _do, sho_ (she), 1231; _stod, mod_, 1702; _ilkon, ston_, 1842;
_shon_ (shoon), _ston_, 2144; _croud, god_, 2338; _don, bon_, 2354;
_sone_ (soon), _bone_, 2504; _bole, hole_, 2438.[44] Only in a few of
these instances would the words rime in modern standard English. For the
_ou_ and _u_ sounds, observe _couþe, mouþe_, 112; _yow, now_, 160;
_wolde, fulde_, 354; _yw, nou_, 453; _bounden, wnden_, 545; _sowel,
couel_, 767; _low, ynow_, 903; _sowen, lowe_, 957; _strout, but_, 1039;
_þou, nou_, 1283; _doun, tun_, 1630; _crus, hous_, 1966; _wounde,
grunde_, 1978; _bowr, tour_, 2072; _spuse, huse_, 2912. _Lowe_, 1291,
2431, 2471, should rather be _lawe_, as in l. 2767. These hints will
probably suffice for the guidance of those who wish to follow up the
subject. It is evident that full dependence cannot be placed upon the
_exactness_ of the rimes.

    [Footnote 37: “This _four accents_ I consider to be a wrong way
    of stating the fact. . . The metre consists of four measures, each
    generally, not always, of _two_ syllables, the first often _one_
    syllable, the others often of _three_ syllables, and each measure
    has generally more stress on the last than on any other, but the
    accents or principal stresses in the verse are usually 2,
    sometimes 3, perhaps never 4.” --A. J. Ellis. I need hardly add
    that such a statement is more exact, and that I here merely use
    the word _accent_ in the loose sense it often bears, viz. as
    denoting the “stress,” more or less heavy, and sometimes
    imperceptible, which is popularly supposed to belong to the last
    syllable in a measure. I must request the reader to remember that
    this present sketch of the metre is very slight and imperfect,
    and worded in the usual not very correct popular language. For
    more strict and careful statements the reader is referred to Mr
    A. J. Ellis’s work on Early English Pronunciation. Until readers
    have made themselves acquainted with that work, they will readily
    understand what I _here_ mean by “accents;” afterwards, they can
    easily adopt a stricter idea of its meaning.]

    [Footnote 38: “You cannot scan this line in any way. This method
    of doing it is quite impossible; it is a mere chopping to make a
    verse like this. The line is corrupt. Omit _þat_, and you have

        Of | a tal’ | ich you | wile telle

    or better,

        Of | a tal’ | ich wil|e telle.” --Ellis.]

    [Footnote 39: The number is that of the _first_ line of the
    pair.]

    [Footnote 40: “You have omitted the curious _harde, krakede_,
    567, here; it is only an assonance, not a mistake, I believe.”
    --Ellis. But see note to l. 567.]

    [Footnote 41: “On _i, e_ rhymes, see p. 271, last line and
    following, of my Chap. IV. The _o, a_ depend on a provincialism,
    and this applies to _sawe_, _wowe_; _beþe_, _rede_; _knaue_,
    _plawe_; _sawe_, _hawe_; &c. _Bouth, oft_ is a case of assonance,
    _bouth_ being _bought_, where properly the _ugh_ is the voiced
    sound of Scotch _quh_, and easily passes into _f_. The assonance
    is therefore nearly a rhyme. _Plattinde, gangande_ is probably a
    scribal error. _Eir, toþer_ is certainly a mistake; read

        Swanborow, helfled, his sistres fair.” --Ellis.

    We may then perhaps alter _gangande_ to _ganginde_. I do not
    quite like writing the modern form _fair_ instead of the old
    plural _fayre_ in order to gain a rime to _eir_. Cf. ll. 1095,
    2300, 2538, 2768.]

    [Footnote 42: “_Hon, lond_ may arise from a Danism, or from an
    English custom at that time of not pronouncing _d_ after _n_ in
    _nd_ final; Danish _Mand_ and German _Mann_ are identical.”
    --Ellis. I prefer to call it Danish; we English, now at least,
    often _add_ a _d_, as in _sound_, _gownd_, from _soun_, _gown_.]

    [Footnote 43: “_Johan_ is almost _Jon_ in Chaucer, however
    written, but l. 177 wants a measure; read--

        Bi [Jhesu] crist, and bi seint ion.

    In l. 1720 also the verse is defective; omit _al_, and read--

        In denemark nis wimman [non]
        So fayr so sche, bi _seint_ Johan,

    where _seint_ is a dissyllable; see p. 264 of my Early English
    Pronunciation. _Hey, fri_, 1071, is an error; read _hy_, and see
    p. 285 of my book. The other instances of _ei_, _ai_ are all
    regular, the confusion of _ei_, _ai_ being perfect in the
    thirteenth century. _Shame_, l. 88, is dative, and would prove
    nothing, but _shame_ in Orrmin is conclusive. Hence in _sham’_,
    56, we have an _e_ omitted; compare p. 323 of my book, and the
    German _Ruh’_.” --Ellis. In other places, the spelling _heye_
    occurs, rather than _hy_: see ll. 719, 987, 1071, 1083, 1289,
    1685, 2431, 2471, 2544, 2724, 2750, 2945, &c.]

    [Footnote 44: “The instances of _o_ are all regular, except
    _croud, god_, 2338, which is a false rhyme altogether; _ou_ =
    modern _oo_.” --Ellis.]


§ 29. ON THE FINAL -E, &c.

There can be little doubt that the final _-e_ is, in general, fully
pronounced in this poem wherever it is written, with but a very few
exceptions; but at the same time it is liable to be elided when followed
by a vowel or (sometimes) by the letter _h_, as is usual in old English
poetry. In the following remarks, I shall use an apostrophe to signify
that _e_ is _written, but not pronounced_; thus “wil’” signifies that
“wile” is the MS. form, but “wil” the apparent pronunciation. I shall
use an italic _e_ to signify that the _e_ is elided because followed by
a vowel or _h_, as “cupp_e_” (l. 14); and in the same way, “rid_en_,”
“lit_el_,” &c, signify that the syllables _-en_, _-el_ are slurred over
in a like manner. It will be seen that such syllables are, in general,
slurred over when they occur before a vowel or _h_; under the same
circumstances, that is, as the final _-e_. When I simply write the word
in the form “gode” as in the MS., I mean that the _-e_ is _fully
pronounced_; so that “gode” stands for “godë.”

The following, then, are instances. I follow the order in Mr Morris’s
Introduction to Chaucer’s Prologue, &c. (Clarendon Press Series).

(_A_) In nouns and adjectives (of A.S. origin) the final _-e_ represents
one of the final vowels _a_, _u_, _e_, and hence is fully sounded even
in the nominative case in such instances. Examples; gome (A.S. _goma_),
7, blome (A.S. _bloma_), 63, trewe (A.S. _treowe_), 179, knaue (A.S.
_cnafa_), 308, 450, sone (A.S. _sunu_), 394.

(_B_) In words of French origin it is sounded as in French verse. Such
words are scarce in Havelok. Examples: hayse, 59, beste, 279, mirácle,
500, rose, 2919, curtesye (_miswritten_ curteyse), 2876, cf. 194,
drurye, 195, male, 48, large, 97, noble, 1263.

(_C_) It is a remnant of various grammatical inflexions:--

(1) it is a sign of the _dative_ case in nouns; as, nede, 9, stede,
10, trome, 8, wronge, 72, stede, 142, dede (not elided, because of the
cæsura), 167, arke, 222, erþe, 248, lite þrawe, 276. It also sometimes
marks the accusative, or the genitive of feminine nouns: _accusatives_,
cupp_e_, 14, wede, 94, brede, 98, shrede, 99, mede, 102, quiste, 219,
sorwe, 238 (cf. sorw’ in l. 240), son_e_, 308, knaue, 308, sone, 350,
wille, 441: _genitives_, messe, 186, 188, helle, 405.

(2) In adjectives it marks--

(_a_) the _definite form_ of the adjective; as, þe meste, 233, þe riche
(not elided[45]), 239, te beste, 87, þe hexte [man], 1080, þat wicke,
1158, þat foule, 1158, þe firste, 1333, þe rede, 1397. This rule is most
often violated in the case of _dissyllabic_ superlatives; as, þe
wictest’, 8, þe fairest, þe strangest, 1081, 1110; cf. 199, 200.

(_b_) the _plural_ number. Examples abound, as, gode, 1, alle, 2, are,
27, yung = yung_e_, 30, holde, 30, gode, 34, 55, harde, 143, gren_e_,
470, bleike, 470, halte, 543, doumbe, 543, &c.

The same use is often extended to possessive pronouns; we find the
plurals mine, 385, 514 (but min’, 392), þine, 620, hise, 34, 67, hure,
1231; and even the singulars hire, 84, 85, hure, 338, yure, 171. But the
personal pronoun feminine is often hir’, 172, 209; yet see l. 316.

(_c_) the _vocative_ case, as, dere, 839, 2170; leue, 909.

(3) In verbs it marks--

(_a_) the infinitive mood; as, telle, 3, duelle, 4, falle, 39, bey_e_,
53, swere, 254, be-bedde, 421, ber_e_, 549, &c. On this point there
cannot be a moment’s doubt, for the form _-en_ is found quite as often,
and they rime together, as in 254, 255, cf. 29, 30. But it is well worth
remarking that _-en_ is slurred over exactly where _-e_ would be, with
much regularity. Examples are: rid_en_, 10, biginn_en_, 21, mak_en_, 29,
heng_en_, 43, lurk_en_, 68, crep_en_, 68, rid_en_, 88, hau_en_, 270.
Other examples are very numerous. But we sometimes find _-en_ not
slurred over, as, drinken, 15; and the same is true even of _-e_, but
such cases are exceptional and rare.

(_b_) the gerund; as, to preyse, 60.

(_c_) the past participle of a strong verb; as, drawe, 1802, slawe,
1803. But these are rare, as they are commonly written drawen, slawen,
2224.

(_d_) the past tense of weak verbs, where the _-e_ follows _-ed_, _-t_,
or _-d_. Examples are very numerous; as, louede = lov’de, 30, 35 (not
elided), 37, hauede = hav’de, 343; cf. haued = havd’, 336; þurte, 10,
durst_e_, 65, reft_e_, 94; dede, 29, sende, 136, seyde, 228, herde, 286.
Observe hated = hated_e_, 40. The plurals of these tenses are rarely in
_-e_, generally in _-en_, as, haueden, 241, ded_en_, 242, sprauleden =
spraul’den, 475.

(_e_) the subjunctive or optative mood, or the 3rd person of the
imperative mood, which is really the 3rd person of the subjunctive. This
rule seems to be carefully observed. Examples are yeue, 22, thaue, 296,
yerne, 299, leue, 406, were, 513, wit_e_, 517, &c. So for the _first_
person, as, lat_e_, 509, lepe (not elided), 2009, spek_e_, 2079; and for
the _second_ person, as, understonde, 1159, fare, 2705, cone, 622, 623.

(_f_) other parts of a _few_ verbs; thus, the 1st person singular
present, as, liue, 301, ete, 793, rede, 1660, wille, 388, where _wille_
is equivalent to _wish_.

(_g_) present participles: thus, plattínde, 2282, is a half-rime to
gangánde. In other places, the author is careful to place them before a
vowel, as gretind_e_, 1390, lauhwind_e_, 946, starind_e_, 508,
driuend_e_, 2702, fastind_e_, 865.

(4) In adverbs the final _-e_ denotes--

(_a_) an older vowel-ending; as, son_e_ (A.S. _sóna_), 136, sone, 218,
251, yete (A.S. _géta_, as well as _gét_), 495, ofte (Swed. _ofta_, Dan.
_ofte_), 227.

(_b_) an adverb as distinguished from its corresponding adjective, as,
yerne, 153, loude, 96, longe, 241, more, 301, softe, 305, heye, 335,
swiþe, 455, harde, 639. Hence, in l. 640, we should read _neye_.

(_c_) an older termination in _-en_ or _-an_; as, þer-hinne, 322, 709,
712, henne, 843, inne, 855. Cf. A.S. _heonan_, _innan_.

(_d_) It is also sounded in the termination _-like_, as, sikerlike, 422.
Hence, in baldelike, 53, _both_ the _ees_ are sounded; cf. feblelike,
418. When the final _-e_ is slurred over before an _h_ in _Chaucer_, _h_
is found commonly to begin the pronoun _he_, or its cases, the
possessive pronouns _his_, _hire_, or their cases, a part of the verb to
_have_, or else the adverbs _how_ or _heer_. The same rule seems to hold
in _Havelok_. Observe, that _e_ often forms a syllable in the _middle_
of a word, as, bondeman, 32, engelondes, 63, pourelik_e_, 322.

With regard to the final _-en_, it is most commonly slurred over before
a vowel or the _h_ in _he_ or _haue_, not only when it is the
termination of the infinitive mood, but in _many other cases_. One
striking example may suffice:

  He gret_en_ and gouled_en_ and gou_en_ hem ille, 164.

A still more striking peculiarity is that _the same rule often holds_
for the ending _-es_. We find it, of course, forming a distinct syllable
in plurals; as, limes, 86; and in adverbs, as, liues, 509. But observe
such instances as maydn_es_, 2, prest_es_, 33, vtlaw_es_, 41, siþ_es_,
213, &c.

In the same way, when rapid final syllables such as _-el_, _-er_,
_-ere_, &c., are slurred over, it will _generally_ be found _that a
vowel or_ h _follows them_. Examples: lit_el_, 6, won_eth_, 105,
bed_els_, 266, bod_i_, 345, deu_el_, 446, hung_er_, 449. Compare
ou_er_al, 38, 54. There are many other peculiarities which it would take
long to enumerate, such as, that _sworn_ is pronounced _sworen_, 204;
that the final _-e_ is sometimes preserved before a vowel, as in _dedë
am_, 167; that the word _ne_ is very frequently not counted, as it were,
in the scansion, as in 57, 113, 220, 419, the second _ne_ in l. 547, and
in several other places. But it must suffice to state merely, that when
the above rules (with allowance of a few exceptions) are carefully
observed, it will be found that the metre of Havelok is _very regular_,
and _valuable on account of its regularity_.

It would therefore be easy to correct the text in many places by help of
an exact analysis of the rhythm. But this, except in a very few places,
has not been attempted, because the imperfect, but unique, MS. copy is
more instructive as it stands. In l. 19, e.g. _wit_ should be _wite_; in
l. 47, _red_ should be _rede_; in l. 74, _his soule_ should be _of his
soule_, &c. The importance of attending to the final _-e_ may be
exemplified by the lines--

  Allë greten swiþë sore, 236;
  But sonë dedë hirë fetë, 317;
  þinë cherlës, þinë hinë, 620;
  Grimës sonës allë þre, 1399;
  Hisë sistres herë lif, 2395.

Mr Ellis writes-- “These final examples suggested to me to compose the
following German epitaph, which contains just as many final _e_’s, and
which I think no German would find to have anything peculiar in the
versification:

GRABSCHRIFT.

  Diese alte reiche Frau
  Hasste jede eitle Schau,
  Preiste Gottes gute Gabe,
  Mehrte stets die eig’ne Habe,
  Liegt hier unbeweint im Grabe.

I think Havelok may be well compared with Goethe’s ballad,

  Es war ein Kön_ig in Thu_le,
    Gar treu bis an das Grab,
  Dem, sterbend, seine Buhle
    _Einen gold_enen Becher gab.

  Es ging ihm nichts darüber,
    Er leert’ ihn jeden Schmaus,
  Die Augen gin_gen ihm ü_ber
    So oft er trank daraus.

  Und als er kam zu sterben,
    Zählt’ er _seine Städt’_ im Reich,
  Gönnt’ alles seinem Erben,
    Den Becher nicht zugleich:--

and the end:--

  Die Augen thä_ten ihm sin_ken,
    Trank nie _einen Trop_fen mehr.

The _italicised_ trisyllabic measures are fine. Observe also the
elisions of final _-e_ before a following vowel (_Städt’_ being very
unusual), and the omission of the dative _-e_ in _im Reich_, to rhyme
with _zugleich_.”

I have only to add that my special thanks are due to Sir F. Madden for
his permission to make use of his valuable notes, glossary, and preface,
and for his assistance; as also to Mr Ellis for his notes, which,
however, reached me only at the last moment, when much alteration of the
proofs was troublesome. There are many things probably which Mr Ellis
does not much approve of in this short popular sketch of the metre, in
which attention is drawn only to some of the _principal_ points. In
particular, he disapproves of the term _slurring over_, though I believe
that I mean precisely the same thing aa he does, viz. that these light
syllables are really _fully pronounced_, and not in any way forcibly
suppressed; but that, owing to their being light syllables, and
occurring before vowel sounds, the full pronunciation of them does not
cause the verse to halt, but merely imparts to it an agreeable vivacity.
As I have already said elsewhere[46]-- “A poet’s business is, in fact,
to take care that the syllables which _are_ to be rapidly pronounced are
such as easily _can_ be so; and that the syllables which are to be
heavily accented are naturally those that _ought_ to be. If he gives
attention to this, it does not much matter whether each foot has _two_
or _three_ syllables in it.”

    [Footnote 45: _Riche_ being both A.S. and French, has the _e_
    even when indefinite; a riche king, 841; a riche man, 373.]

    [Footnote 46: Preface to Mr Morris’s Genesis and Exodus, p.
    xxxviii.]




EMENDATIONS, ETC.


  [Transcriber’s Note:
  This section is shown as printed. The editor’s corrections were
  variously handled. Minor changes to the primary text are shown in
  brackets; the more complicated or tentative emendations are given as
  supplementary footnotes in the form [5*]. Additions to the Glossary
  are shown as separate, bracketed paragraphs. The following paragraph
  is part of the original text.]

Some emendations have been made in the text by inserting letters and
words within square brackets. A few more may be noticed here.

p. 2, l. 47. The MS. has _red_; but it should be _rede_.

p. 3, l. 66. For the MS. reading _here_ Mr Garnett proposed to read
_othere_, which is clearly right.

p. 3, l. 74. For _his soule_ (as in the MS.) we should probably read _of
his soule_.

p. 3, l. 79. For _wo diden_ (as in the MS.) we should read _wo so dide_.

p. 6, l. 177. _Read_-- “Bi [ihesu] crist,” &c, to fill up; but this is
doubtful; see l. 1112.

p. 18, l. 560. For _with_, Mr Garnett proposed to read _wilt_.

p. 20, l. 640. For _ney_ (as in MS.) read _neye_, the adverbial form.

p. 21, l. 660. Perhaps there should be a comma after _Slep_, making the
sense to be _sleep, son_, not _sleep soon_.

p. 23, l. 746. For _alle_, Mr Garnett proposed to read _shalle_.

p. 24, l. 784. Perhaps we should, however, read _se-weren_, and the note
on the line (p. 93) may be wrong. See _Weren_ in the Glossary.

p. 32, l. 1037. For _stareden_ we should perhaps read _stradden_; see
the Glossary.

p. 33, l. 1080. For _hexte_ we should rather read _hexte_ [_man_]; cf.
l. 199.

p. 38, l. 1233. Mr Garnett suggested that _cloþen_ may mean _clothes_.
If so, dele the comma after it.

p. 43, l. 1420. For _wolde_ we should rather read [_he_] _wolde_.

p. 46, l. 1687. _þarned_ is an error of the scribe for _þoled_; see the
Glossary.

p. 47, l. 1720. Perhaps we should rather read--_is womman_ [_non_].

p. 47, l. 1733. _Bidde_ must mean _offer_, rather than _bid_ (as in the
Glossary); unless it be miswritten for _bide_ = tarry.

p. 47, l. 1736. The MS. reading _deled_ should be _deyled_; cf. l. 2099.

p. 76, l. 2670. The MS. reading _blinne_ should clearly be _blunne_.
A few other suggestions of emendations will be found in the Glossarial
Index. See the words _Arwe_, _Birþe_, _Felde_, _Sor_, _Tauhte_, _Þenne_,
_Thit_, _Werewed_, _Wreken_, &c. See also the suggestions in the
preface, pp. xxxix, xli, xlvi, xlvii.  [§ 27: Grammatical Forms; § 28:
Metre]

p. 132, s.v. _Loken_. The reference to the Ancren Riwle is to MS. Titus
D 18, fol. 17; cf. the edition by Morton (Camd. Soc. 1853), p. 56.

In the Glossary, _Dunten_ is wrongly placed after _Dint_.

Also, _Greting_ is wrongly placed before _Gres_.

_Hal_, more probably, is shortened from _half_, like _twel_ from
_twelue_.

_Shoten_, in l. 1838, means _rushed_, _darted_, _flew_.

_Teyte_ may mean _lively_. My explanation is not generally accepted.

_Bise_ occurs in l. 724.




+Incipit vita Hauelok, quondam Rex Anglie et Denemarchie.+


  [Sidenote: [Fol. 204, col. 1.]]
  [Sidenote: Hearken!]
    +Herknet to me, gode men,
    Wiues, maydnes, and alle men,
    Of a tale þat ich you wile telle,
    Wo so it wile here, and þer-to duelle.                         4
  [Sidenote: I will tell you the tale of Havelok,
  a wight man at need.]
    Þe tale is of hauelok i-maked;
    Wil he was litel he yede ful naked:
    Hauelok was a ful god gome,
    He was ful god in eueri trome,                                 8
    He was þe wicteste ma{n} at nede,
    Þat þurte ride{n} on ani stede.
    Þat ye mowen nou y-here,
    And þe tale ye mowen y-lere.                                  12
    At the begi{n}ning[1] of vre tale,
  [Sidenote: First, fill me a cup of ale.]
    Fil me a cuppe of ful god ale;
    And [y] wile dri{n}ken her y spelle,
    Þat crist vs shilde alle fro helle!                           16
    Krist late vs heu{er}e so for to do,
  [Sidenote: Christ grant we may do right!]
    Þat we moten comen him to,
    And wit[e][2] þat it mote ben so!
    _Benedicamus domino!_                                         20
    Here y schal bigi{n}nen a rym,
    Krist us yeue wel god fyn!
  [Sidenote: The rime is about Havelok.]
    The rym is maked of hauelok,
    A stalworþi man i{n} a flok;                                  24
    He was þe stalworþeste ma{n} at nede,
    Þat may riden on ani stede.

      [Footnote 1: MS. Begi{n}nig.]

      [Footnote 2: _See_ ll. 517, 1316.]


[Headnote: THE GOOD KING ATHELWOLD / IS KING OVER ALL ENGLAND.]

  [Sidenote: There was once a king who made good laws.]
    +IT was a king bi are dawes,
    That i{n} his time were gode lawes                            28
    He dede maken, an ful wel holden;
    Hym louede yu{n}g, him louede holde,
    Erl and barun, dreng and kayn,
    Knict, bondema{n}, and swain,                                 32
  [Sidenote: All loved him.]
    Wydues, maydnes, p{re}stes and clerkes,
    And al for hise gode werkes.
    He louede god with al his micth,
    And holi kirke, and soth, ant ricth;                          36
    Ricth-wise[3] man he louede alle,
    And ou{er}al made hem forto calle;
  [Sidenote: He hated traitors and robbers.]
    Wreieres and wrobberes made he falle,
    And hated he{m} so ma{n} doth galle;                          40
    Vtlawes and theues made he bynde,
    Alle that he micthe fynde,
    And heye he{n}gen on galwe-tre;
    For hem ne yede gold ne fe.                                   44
  [Sidenote: At that time, men could carry gold about safely,
  and boldly buy and sell.]
    In that time a man þat bore
    [Wel fyfty pund, y woth, or more,][4]
  [Sidenote: [Fol. 204, col. 2.]]
    Of red[e][4*] gold up-on hijs bac,
    In a male with or blac,                                       48
    Ne funde he non that him misseyde,
    N[e] with iuele on [him] hond leyde.
    Þa{n}ne micthe chapme{n} fare
    Þuruth englond wit here ware,                                 52
    And baldelike beye and selle{n},
    Oueral þer he wilen dwellen,
    In gode burwes, and þer-fram
    Ne funde{n} he non þat dede he{m} sham,                       56
    Þat he ne were{n} sone to sorwe brouth,
    An pou{er}e maked, and browt to nouth.
    Þa{n}ne was engelond at hayse;[5]
  [Sidenote: Then was England at ease.]
    Michel was svich a king to preyse,                            60
    Þat held so eng[e]lond in grith!
    Krist of heuene was him with.
    He was engelondes blome;
    Was non so bold lond to rome,                                 64
    Þat durste upon his [menie] bringhe
    Hunger, ne here[5*] wicke þinghe.
    Hwan he felede hise foos,
  [Sidenote: The king made his foes hide themselves.]
    He made he{m} lurken, and crepe{n} in wros:                   68
    Þe hidde{n} he{m} alle, and helde{n} he{m} stille,
    And diden al his herte wille.
    Ricth he louede of alle þinge,
    To wronge micht hi{m} no man bri{n}ge,                        72
    Ne for siluer, ne for gold:--
    So was he his soule[5*] hold.
  [Sidenote: He befriended the fatherless.]
    To þe faderles was he rath,
    Wo so dede hem wrong or lath,                                 76
    Were it clerc, or were it knicth,
    He dede hem sone to haue{n} ricth;
    And wo [so] dide{n}[5*] widuen wrong,
    Were he neure knicth so strong,                               80
    Þat he ne made hi{m} sone kesten,
    And in fet{er}es ful faste festen;
  [Sidenote: Them who wrought shame he punished.]
    And wo so dide maydne shame
    Of hire bodi, or brouth i{n} blame,                           84
    Bute it were bi hire wille,
    He[6] made hi{m} sone of limes spille.
    He was te[7] beste knith at nede,
    Þat heuere micthe ride{n} on stede,                           88
    Or wepne wagge, or folc vt lede;
    Of knith ne hauede he neu{er}e drede,
    Þat he ne spro{n}g forth so sparke of glede,
  [Sidenote: [Fol. 204b, col. 1.]]
    And lete him [knawe] of hise hand-dede,                       92
    Hw he couþe with wepne spede;
  [Sidenote: He made his foes cry for mercy.]
    And oþer he refte hi{m} hors or wede,
    Or made him sone ha{n}des sprede,
    And “louerd, me{r}ci!” loude grede.                           96
    He was large, and no wicth gnede;
    Hauede he non so god brede,
    Ne on his bord no{n} so god shrede,
  [Sidenote: He fed the poor.]
    Þat he ne wolde þorwit fede,                                 100
    Poure þat on fote yede;
    Forto haue{n} of him þe mede
    Þat for vs wolde on rode blede,
    Crist, that al kan wisse and rede,                           104
    Þat euere woneth i{n} ani þede.

      [Footnote 3: MS. “Rirth wise.”]

      [Footnote 4: Supplied from conjecture. Cf. v. 653, 787. A few
      more instances will be found where a similar liberty has been
      taken, for the purpose of completing the sense.]

      [Footnote 4*: Changed by editor from “red”: see Emendations.]

      [Footnote 5: MS. athayse.]

      [Footnotes 5* (all from Emendations):
      l. 66: “For the MS. reading _here_ Mr Garnett proposed
      to read _othere_, which is clearly right.”
      l. 74: “For _his soule_ (as in the MS.) we should
      probably read _of his soule_.”
      l. 79: “For _wo diden_ (as in the MS.) we should read _wo so
      dide_.”]

      [Footnote 6: MS. Ke.]

      [Footnote 7: MS. Ke waste.]


[Headnote: ATHELWOLD IS ABOUT TO DIE.]

  [Sidenote: His name was Athelwold.]
    ¶ Þe ki{n}g was hoten aþelwold,
    Of word, of wepne he was bold;
    In engeland was neure knicth,                                108
    Þat bet{er}e hel þe lond to ricth.
  [Sidenote: He had but a young daughter to succeed him.]
    Of his bodi ne hauede he eyr
    Bute a mayden swiþe fayr,
    Þat was so yung þat sho ne couþe                             112
    Gon on fote, ne speke wit mouþe.
    Þan him tok an iuel strong,
    Þat he we[l] wiste, and under-fong,
  [Sidenote: He feels he is dying, and says, “I am in trouble
  about her.]
    Þat his deth was come{n} him on:                             116
    And seyde, “c{ri}st, wat shal y don!
    Louerd, wat shal me to rede!
    I woth ful wel ich haue mi mede.
    W shal nou mi douhter fare?                                  120
    Of hire haue ich michel kare;
    Sho is mikel in mi þouth,
    Of me self is me rith nowt.
    No selcouth is, þou me be wo;                                124
    Sho ne ka{n} speke, ne sho kan go.
  [Sidenote: Were she but of age, I would not care for myself.”]
    Yif scho couþe on horse ride,
    And a thousa{n}de me{n} bi hire syde;
    And sho were com{en} intil helde,                            128
    And engelond sho couþe welde;
    And don hem of þar hire were q{ue}me,
    An hire bodi couþe yeme;
    No wolde me neu{er}e iuele like                              132
    Me þou ich were i{n} heuene-riche!”


[Headnote: HE SUMMONS HIS LORDS TO WINCHESTER.]

    +Qua{n}ne he hauede þis plei{n}te maked,
    Þer-after stro{n}glike [he] quaked.
    He sende writes sone on-on                                   136
  [Sidenote: [Fol. 204b, col. 2.]]
    After his erles eu{er}e-ich on;
  [Sidenote: He summons his lords, from Roxburgh to Dover.]
    And after hise baru{n}s, riche and poure,
    Fro rokesburw al i{n}to douere,
    That he shulde{n} comen swiþe                                140
    Til him, that was ful vnbliþe;
    To þat stede þe[r] he lay,
    In harde bondes, nicth and day.
    He was so faste wit yuel fest,                               144
    Þat he ne mouthe haue{n} no rest;
  [Sidenote: He can no longer eat.]
    He ne mouthe no mete hete,
    Ne he ne mouchte no lyþe gete;
    Ne non of his iuel þat couþe red;                            148
    Of him ne was nouth bute{n} ded.


  [Sidenote: All sadly obey his summons.]
    +Alle þat the writes herden,
    Sorful an sori til him ferde{n};
    He wru{n}gen ho{n}des, and wepe{n} sore,                     152
    And yerne preyde{n} cristes hore,
    Þat he [wolde] t{ur}nen him
    Vt of þat yuel þat was so grim!
    Þa{n}ne he weren comen alle                                  156
  [Sidenote: They come to Winchester.]
    Bifor þe king i{n}to the halle,
    At wi{n}chestre þer he lay:
    “Welcome,” he seyde, “be ye ay!
    Ful michel þank[e] kan [y] yow                               160
    That ye aren come{n} to me now!”


[Headnote: ATHELWOLD SELECTS EARL GODRICH / TO BE HIS DAUGHTER’S
GUARDIAN.]

  [Sidenote: They all mourn and lament.]
    +Quanne he were{n} alle set,
    And þe king aueden i-gret,
    He grete{n}, and goulede{n}, and goue{n} he{m} ille,         164
    And he bad he{m} alle ben stille;
    And seyde, “þat greti{n}g helpeth nouth,
    For al to dede am ich brouth.
    Bute nov ye sen þat i shal deye,                             168
  [Sidenote: He prays them to tell him who can guard
  his daughter best.]
    Nou ich wille you alle preye
    Of mi douther þat shal be
    Yure leuedi after me,
    Wo may yeme{n} hire so longe,                                172
    Boþen hire and engelonde,
    Til þat she [mowe] winan of helde,
    And þa she mowe yeme{n} and welde?”
    He ansuered{en}, and seyd{en} an-on,                         176
  [Sidenote: They answer, “Earl Godrich of Cornwall.”]
    Bi crist[7*] and bi seint ion,
    That þerl Godrigh of cornwayle
    Was trewe ma{n}, wit-ute{n} faile;
    Wis ma{n} of red, wis ma{n} of dede,                         180
    And me{n} hauede{n} of hi{m} mikel drede.
  [Sidenote: [Fol. 205, col. 1.]]
    “He may hire alþer-best[e] yeme,
    Til þat she mowe wel be{n} quene.”

      [Footnote 7* (from Emendations):
      “_Read_-- “Bi [ihesu] crist,” &c, to fill up; but this is
      doubtful; see l. 1112.”]


  [Sidenote: The king sends for chalice and paten,
  for the earl to swear upon.]
    +Þe king was payed of that Rede;                             184
    A wol fair cloth bri{n}ge{n} he dede,
    And þer-on leyde þe messebok,
    Þe caliz, and þe pateyn ok,
    Þe corporaus, þe messe-gere;                                 188
    Þer-on he garte þe erl suere,
    Þat he sholde yemen hire wel,
    With-ute{n} lac, wit-ute{n} tel,
    Til þat she were tuelf[8] wi{n}ter hold,                     192
    And of speche were bold;
    And þat she covþe of curteysye,
  [Sidenote: His daughter is to marry the best and fairest
  man that can be found.]
    Gon, and speken of luue-drurye;
    And til þat she louen þoucte,[9]                             196
    Wom so hire to gode thoucte;
    And þat he shulde hire yeue
    Þe beste ma{n} that micthe liue,
    Þe beste, fayreste, the stra{n}gest ok:--                    200
    Þat dede he him sweren on þe bok.
    And þa{n}ne shulde he engelond
    Al bitechen in-to hire hond.

      [Footnote 8: _Qu._ tuenti. Cf. v. 259.]

      [Footnote 9: MS. mithe. But see l. 257.]


    +Quanne[10] þat was sworn on his wise,                       204
  [Sidenote: He gives up all England to the earl,
  to keep for her.]
    Þe ki{n}g dede þe mayde{n} arise,
    And þe erl hire bitaucte,
    And al the lond he euere awcte;
    Engelonde eueri del;                                         208
    And preide, he shulde yeme hire wel.

      [Footnote 10: MS. Ouanne. And perhaps “his” should have been
      “þis.”]


    +Þe king ne mowcte don no more,
    But yerne preyede godes ore;
    And dede him hosle{n} wel and shriue,                        212
  [Sidenote: The king does penance.]
    I woth, fif hu{n}dred siþes and fiue;
    An ofte dede him sore swinge,
    And wit hondes smerte di{n}ge;
    So þat þe blod ran of his fleys,                             216
    Þat tendre was, and swiþe neys.
    [11]And sone gaf it euere-il del;
    He made his quiste swiþe wel.
  [Sidenote: He makes his will.]
    Wan it was goue{n}, ne micte me{n} finde                     220
    So mikel me{n} micte hi{m} in winde,
    Of his i{n} arke, ne in chiste,
    In engelond þat noma{n} wiste:
    For al was youe{n}, faire and wel,                           224
    Þat him was leued no catel.

      [Footnote 11: Some lines appear to be wanting here, such as--

        “He þoucte his quiste þan to make,
        His catel muste he wel bitake,” &c.]


[Headnote: KING ATHELWOLD DIES.]

    +Þa{n}ne he hauede be{n} ofte swngen,
  [Sidenote: [Fol. 205, col. 2.]]
    Ofte shriue{n}, and ofte dungen,
    “_In man{us} tuas_, lou[{er}]de,” he seyde,                  228
    Her þat he þe speche leyde.
  [Sidenote: The king dies.]
    To ihe{s}u crist bigan to calle,
    And deyede biforn his heyme{n} alle.
    Þan he was ded, þere micte me{n} se                          232
    Þe meste sorwe that micte be;
    Þer was sobbing, siking, and sor,
    Handes wri{n}gi{n}g, and drawi{n}g bi hor.
  [Sidenote: All mourn for him.]
    Alle greten swiþe sore,                                      236
    Riche and poure þat þere wore;
    An mikel sorwe hauede{n} alle,
    Leuedyes i{n} boure, knictes i{n} halle.


  [Sidenote: Masses are sung for him.]
    +Quan þat sorwe was somdel laten,                            240
    And he hauede{n} longe graten,
    Belles dede{n} he sone ri{n}gen,
    Monkes and p{re}stes messe singen;
    And saut{er}es deden he manie reden,                         244
    Þat god self shulde his soule lede{n}
    Into heuene, biforn his sone,
    And þer wit-uten hende wone.
  [Sidenote: He is buried and the earl takes possession,
  till the maiden is twenty years old.]
    Þan he was to þe erþe brouth,                                248
    Þe riche erl ne foryat nouth,
    Þat he ne dede al engelond
    Sone sayse i{n}til his hond;
    And in þe castels leth he[12] do                             252
    Þe knictes he micte triste{n} to;
    And alle þe englis dede he swere[{n}],
    Þat he shulde{n} him ghod fey baren;
    He yaf alle me{n}, þat god þoucte,                           256
    Liuen and deyen til þat him moucte,[13]
    Til þat þe kinges dowter wore
    Tuenti wint{er} hold, and more.

      [Footnote 12: Sir F. Madden printed “lechhe”; but the MS. may
      be read “leth he.”]

      [Footnote 13: So in MS. But the sense requires

        “He gaf alle men, þat god _him_ þouchte,
        Liuen and deyen til þat _he_ mouete,” &c.]


[Headnote: EARL GODRICH TAKES POSSESSION.]

    +Þa{n}ne he hauede take{n} þis oth                           260
    Of erles, baru{n}s, lef and loth,
    Of knictes, cherles, fre and þewe,
  [Sidenote: Earl Godrich appoints justices, sheriffs, &c.]
    Justises dede he maken newe,
    Al engelond to faren þorw,                                   264
    Fro douere i{n}to rokesborw.
    Schireues he sette, bedels, and g{re}yues,
    Grith-sergea{n}s, wit lo{n}ge gleyues,
    To yeme{n} wilde wodes and paþes                             268
    Fro wicke me{n}, that wolde don scaþes;
    And forto haue{n} alle at his cri,
    At his wille, at his merci;
  [Sidenote: [Fol. 205b, col. 1.]]
    Þat non durste be{n} him ageyn,                              272
    Erl ne baron, knict ne sweyn.
  [Sidenote: He grows very rich, and all England fears him.]
    Wislike for soth, was him wel
    Of folc, of wepne, of catel,
    Soþlike, in a lite þrawe                                     276
    Al engelond of him stod [in] awe;
    Al engelond was of him adrad,[14]
    So his þe beste fro þe gad.

      [Footnote 14: MS. “adred,” altered to “adrad.”]


  [Sidenote: The maiden grows up very fair.]
    +Þe ki{n}ges douther bigan þriue,                            280
    And wex þe fayrest wma{n} on liue.
    Of alle þewes w[as] she wis,
    Þat gode weren, and of pris.
  [Sidenote: Her name is Goldborough.]
    Þe mayden Goldeboru was hoten;                               284
    For hire was mani a ter igroten.


[Headnote: GODRICH PLOTS AGAINST HIS WARD.]

    +Quanne the Erl godrich him herde
    Of þat mayde{n}, hw we[l s]he ferde;
    Hw wis sho was, w chaste, hw fayr,                           288
    And þat sho was þe rithe eyr
    Of engelond, of al þe rike:--
  [Sidenote: Godrich is vexed.]
    Þo bigan godrich to sike,
    And seyde, “weþer she sholde be                              292
    Quen and leuedi ouer me?
    Hweþer sho sholde al engelond,
    And me, and mine, haue{n} in hire hond?
    Daþeit hwo it hire thaue!                                    296
    Shal sho it neu{er}e more haue.
  [Sidenote: “Shall I give England to a fool, a girl?]
    Sholde ic yeue a fol, a þerne,
    Engelond, þou sho it yerne?
    Daþeit hwo it hire yeue,                                     300
    Euere more hwil i liue!
    Sho is waxen al to prud,
    For gode metes, and noble shrud,
    Þat hic haue youen hire to offte;                            304
    Hic haue yemed hire to softe.
    Shal it nouth ben als sho þenkes,
    ‘Hope maketh fol ma{n} ofte ble{n}kes.’
  [Sidenote: My son shall have England.”]
    Ich haue a sone, a ful fayr knaue,                           308
    He shal e{n}gelond al haue.
    He shal [ben] ki{n}g, he shal ben sire,
    So brouke i eu{er}e mi blake swire!”


  [Sidenote: He lets his oath go for nothing.]
    +Hwan þis t{r}ayson was al þouth,                            312
    Of his oth ne was him nouth.
    He let his oth al ouer-ga,
    Þerof ne yaf he nouth a stra;
    But sone dede hire fete,                                     316
  [Sidenote: [Fol. 205b, col. 2.]]
    Er he wolde hete{n} ani mete,
    Fro wi{n}chestre þer sho was,
    Also a wicke t{r}aytur iudas;
  [Sidenote: He sends the maiden to Dover.]
    And dede lede{n} hire to doure,                              320
    Þat standeth on þe seis oure;
    And þerhinne dede hire fede
    Pourelike in feble wede,
  [Sidenote: He shuts her up in the castle.]
    Þe castel dede he yemen so,                                  324
    Þat non ne micte come{n} hire to
    Of hire frend, with [hire] to speke{n},
    Þat heuere micte hire bale wreke{n}.


    +Of Goldeb{oru} shul we nou laten,                           328
    Þat nouth ne bli{n}neth forto g{ra}te{n},
    Þet sho liggeth in p{ri}soun:
  [Sidenote: May Christ release Goldborough from prison!]
    Ihe{s}u c{r}ist, that lazarun
    To liue broucte fro dede bondes,                             332
    He lese hire wit hise hondes;
    And leue sho mo him y-se
    Heye ha{n}gen on galwe tre,
    Þat hire haued i{n} sorwe brouth,                            336
    So as sho ne misdede nouth!


[Headnote: BIRKABEYN IS KING OF DENMARK.]

    +Sawe nou forth i{n} hure spelle;
  [Sidenote: At that time there was a king of Denmark,
  called Birkabeyn.]
    In þat time, so it bifelle,
    Was in þe lon of denemark                                    340
    A riche king, and swyþe stark.
    Þ[e] name of him was birkabeyn,
    He hauede mani knict and sueyn;
    He was fayr man, and wicth,                                  344
    Of bodi he was þe beste knicth
    Þat eu{er}e micte lede{n} uth here,
    Or stede onne ride, or ha{n}dlen spere,
  [Sidenote: He had three children.]
    Þre children he hauede bi his wif,                           348
    He hem louede so his lif.
    He hauede a sone [and] douhtres two,
    Swiþe fayre, as fel it so.
    He þat wile non forbere,                                     352
    Riche ne poure; king ne kaysere,
  [Sidenote: Death came upon him.]
    Deth him tok þa{n} he bes[t] wolde
    Liuen, but hyse dayes were fulde;
    Þat he ne moucte no more liue,                               356
    For gol ne siluer, ne for no gyue.


  [Sidenote: He sends for the priests.]
    +Hwa{n} he þat wiste, raþe he sende
    After p{re}stes fer an hende,
    Chanounes gode, and mo{n}kes beþe,[15]                       360
    Him for to[16] wisse, and to Rede;
  [Sidenote: [Fol. 206, col. 1.]]
    Him for to hoslon, an forto shriue,
    Hwil his bodi were on liue.

      [Footnote 15: MS. “boþe.” But “beþe” rimes to “Rede”; see
      l. 694.]

      [Footnote 16: MS. fort{hm} to, the _hm_ being expuncted.]


[Headnote: BIRKABEYN SELECTS EARL GODARD / TO BE GUARDIAN OF HIS THREE
CHILDREN.]

    +Hwa{n} he was hosled and shriue{n},                         364
    His q{ui}ste maked, and for him gyue{n},
    His knictes dede he alle site,
    For þorw hem he wolde wite,
  [Sidenote: He asks who will guard his children?]
    Hwo micte yeme hise childre{n} yunge,                        368
    Til þat he kouþen speke{n} wit tu{n}ge;
    Speke{n} and gangen, on horse riden,
    Knictes an sweynes bi here side{n}.
    He spoken þer-offe, and chosen sone                          372
    A riche man was under mone,
  [Sidenote: He chooses Godard.]
    Was þe trewest þat he wende,
    Godard, þe kinges oune frende;
    And seyden, he Moucthe he{m} best loke,                      376
    Yif þat he hem vndertoke,
    Til hise sone Mouthe bere
    Helm on heued, and lede{n} vt here,
    In his hand a sp{e}re stark,                                 380
    And king ben maked of denemark.
    He wel trowede þat he seyde,
    And on Godard handes leyde;
  [Sidenote: He commends the children to Godard.]
    And seyde, “Here bi-teche i þe                               384
    Mine childre{n} alle þre,
    Al denemark, and al mi fe,
    Til þat mi sone of helde be;
  [Sidenote: He makes him swear to take care of them,
  and to give up the kingdom to the boy.]
    But þat ich wille, þat þo[u] suere                           388
    On auter, and on messe-gere,
    On þe belles þat men ri{n}ges,
    On messe-bok þe prest on singes,
    Þat þou mine children shalt we[l] yeme,                      392
    Þat hire kin be ful wel queme,
    Til mi sone mowe ben knicth,
    Þanne biteche him þo his Ricth,
    Denemark, and þat þertil lo{n}ges,                           396
    Casteles and tunes, wodes and wo{n}ges.”


  [Sidenote: Godard swears to do so.]
    +Godard stirt up, an swor al þat
    Þe king him bad, and siþen sat
    Bi the knictes, þat þer ware,                                400
    Þat wepen alle swiþe sare
    For þe king þat deide sone:
    Ih{es}u c{ri}st, that makede mone
    On þe mirke nith to shine,                                   404
    Wite his soule fro helle pine;
    And leue þat it mote wone
  [Sidenote: [Fol. 206, col. 2.]]
    In heuene-riche with godes sone!


[Headnote: GODARD IMPRISONS THE THREE CHILDREN.]

  [Sidenote: Godard shuts up the children, Havelok,
  Swanborough, and Helfled, in a castle.]
    +Hwan birkabeyn was leyd i{n} g{ra}ue,                       408
    Þe erl dede sone take þe knaue,
    Hauelok, þat was þe eir,
    Swanborow, his sister, helfled, þe toþer,[17]
    And in þe castel dede he hem do,                             412
    Þer non ne micte hem come{n} to
    Of here kyn, þer þei sperd wore;[18]
    Þer he greten ofte sore,
    Boþe for hunger and for kold,                                416
    Or he weren þre wint{er} hold.
    Feblelike he gaf he{m} cloþes,
  [Sidenote: He cares not for his oaths.]
    He ne yaf a note of hise oþes;
    He hem [ne] cloþede rith, ne fedde,                          420
    Ne hem ne dede richelike be-bedde.
    Þa{n}ne godard was sikerlike
  [Sidenote: He is a traitor.]
    Vnder god þe moste swike,
    Þat eure in erþe shaped was,                                 424
    With-uten on, þe wike Iudas.
  [Sidenote: May he be accursed!]
    Haue he þe malisun to-day
    Of alle þat eure speke{n} may!
    Of p{at}riark, and of pope!                                  428
    And of prest with loke{n} kope!
    Of monekes, and h{er}mites boþe![19]
    And of þe leue holi rode,
    Þat god him-selue ran on blode!                              432
  [Sidenote: Cursed be he by north and south!]
    Crist warie him with his mouth!
    Waried wrthe he of norþ and suth!
    Offe alle man, þat speke{n} kunne!
    Of c{ri}st, þat made[20] mone and su{n}ne!                   436
    Þa{n}ne he hauede of al þe lond
    Al þe folk tilled in-til his hond,
    And alle haueden swore{n} him oth,
    Riche and poure, lef and loth,                               440
    Þat he sholden hise wille freme,
  [Sidenote: He plots against the children.]
    And þat he shulde[{n}] him nouth g{re}me,
    He þouthe a ful strong trechery,
    A trayson, and a felony,                                     444
    Of þe children forto make:
    Þe deuel of helle him sone take!

      [Footnote 17: Corrupt? Lines 410, 411 do not rime well
      together.]

      [Footnote 18: MS. were. But see l. 237.]

      [Footnote 19: Lines 430, 431, 432 rime together. NB. The words
      _holi rode_ are written over an erasure.]

      [Footnote 20: MS. mande.]


  [Sidenote: He goes to the tower where they are.]
    +Hwa{n} þat was þouth, onon he ferde
    To þe tour þer he wore{n} sp{er}de,                          448
    Þer he grete{n} for hunger and cold:
    Þe knaue þat was su{m}del bold,
    Ka{m} him ageyn, on knes him sette,
  [Sidenote: [Fol. 206b, col. 1.]]
    And godard ful feyre he fer grette;                          452
    And Godard seyde, “Wat is yw?
    Hwi grete ye and goulen nou?”
  [Sidenote: Havelok says they are hungry.]
    “For us hu{n}greth swiþe sore:”--
    Seyden he wolde{n} [haue] more,                              456
    “We ne haue to hete, ne we ne haue
    Herinne neyther knith ne knaue
    Þat yeueth us drinke{n}, ne no mete,
    Halue{n}del þat we moun ete.                                 460
  [Sidenote: “Alas, that we were born!”]
    Wo is us þat we weren born!
    Weilawei! nis it no korn,
    Þat men micte make{n} of bred?
    Vs[21] hungreth, we aren ney ded.”                           464

      [Footnote 21: MS. þs; of. l. 455.]


[Headnote: GODARD KILLS SWANBORGUGH AND HELFLED.]

  [Sidenote: Godard cares not.]
    +Godard herde here wa,
    Ther-offe yaf he nouth a stra,
    But tok þe maydnes bothe same{n},
    Al-so it were up-on hiis game{n};                            468
    Al-so he wolde with he{m} leyke,
    Þat were{n} for hunger g{re}ne and bleike.
  [Sidenote: He cuts the throats of the two girls.]
    Of boþen he karf on two here þrotes,
    And siþen [karf] he{m} alto grotes.                          472
    Þer was sorwe, we so it sawe!
    Hwan þe children bi þ[e][22] wawe
    Leyen and spraulede{n} in þe blod:
  [Sidenote: Havelok sees it, and is afraid.]
    Hauelok it saw, and þe[r] bi stod.                           476
    Ful sori was þat seli knaue,
    Mikel dred he mouthe haue,
    For at hise herte he saw a knif,
    For to reuen him hise lyf.                                   480
    But þe knaue,[23] þat litel was,
  [Sidenote: He begs Godard to spare him, offering
  never to oppose him, and to flee from Denmark.]
    He knelede bifor þat iudas,
    And seyde, “louerd, m{er}ci nov!
    Ma{n}rede, louerd, biddi you!                                484
    Al denemark i wile you yeue,
    To þat forward þu late me liue;
    Here hi wile on boke swere,
    Þat neure more ne shal i bere                                488

[Headnote: GODARD SPARES HAVELOK FOR A TIME.]

    Ayen þe, louerd, shel ne spere,
    Ne oþer wepne[24] that may you dere.
    Louerd, haue m{er}ci of me!
    To-day i wile fro denemark fle,                              492
    Ne neu{er}e more comen ageyn:
    Swere{n} y wole, þat bircabein
    Neu{er}e yete me ne gat:”--
    Hwan þe deuel he[r]de[25] that,                              496
  [Sidenote: [Fol. 206b, col. 2.]]
    Sum-del bigan him forto rewe;
    With-drow þe knif, þat was lewe
  [Sidenote: Godard has pity on him.]
    Of þe seli children blod;
    Þer was miracle fair and god!                                500
    Þat he þe knaue nouth ne slou,
    But fo[r] rewnesse him _w_it-drow.[26]
    Of auelok rewede him ful sore,
    And þoucte, he wolde þat he ded wore,                        504
    But on þat he nouth wit his hend
    Ne drepe him nouth,[27] þat fule fend!
    Þoucte he, als he him bi stod,
    Starinde als he were wod:                                    508
  [Sidenote: But he reflects that, were Havelok dead,
  his children would be the heirs.]
    “Yif y late him liues go,
    He micte me wirchen michel wo.
    Grith ne get y neu{er}e mo,
    He may [me] waite{n} for to slo;                             512
    And yf he were brouct of liue,
    And mine childre{n} wolde{n} thriue,
    Lou{er}di{n}ges after me
    Of al denemark micten he be.                                 516
    God it wite, he shal ben ded,
    Wile i take{n} non oþer red;

[Headnote: GODARD TELLS GRIM TO DROWN HAVELOK.]

  [Sidenote: He determines to drown him.]
    I shal do caste{n} hi{m} in þe se,[28]
    Þer i wile þat he drench[ed] be;                             520
    Aboute{n} his hals an anker god,
    Þat he ne flete in the flod.”
  [Sidenote: He sends for a fisherman, and says to him,
  “Grim, I will make you free.]
    Þer anon he dede sende
    After a fishere þat he wende,                                524
    Þat wolde al his wille do,
    And sone anon he seyde him to:
    “Grim, þou wost þu art mi þral,
    Wilte don mi wille al,                                       528
    Þat i wile bidde{n} þe,
    To-morwen [i] shal make{n} þe fre,
    And aucte þe yeuen, and riche make,
    With-þa{n} þu wilt þis child[e] take,                        532
    And lede{n} him with þe to-nicht,
  [Sidenote: Throw this child into the sea”.]
    Þan þou sest se[29] Mone lith,
    In-to þe se, and don him þer-i{n}ne,
    Al wile [i] take{n} on me þe sinne.”                         536
  [Sidenote: Grim binds the child.]
    Grim tok þe child, and bo{n}d hi{m} faste,
    Hwil þe bondes micte laste;
    Þat weren of ful stro{n}g line:--
    Þo was hauelok i{n} ful stro{n}g pine.                       540
    Wiste he neu{er}e her wat was wo:
  [Sidenote: [Fol. 207, col. 1.]]
  [Sidenote: Christ wreak thee of Godard, Havelok!]
    Ih{es}u c{ri}st, þat makede to go
    Þe halte, and þe doumbe speke{n},
    Hauelok, þe of Godard wreken!                                544

      [Footnote 22: MS. biþ; of. l. 2470.]

      [Footnote 23: MS. kaue.]

      [Footnote 24: MS. “wepne bere,” where “bere” is redundant.]

      [Footnote 25: MS. hede.]

      [Footnote 26: Printed thus in the former edition:-- “But to
      rewnesse him thit drow.” But the MS. has _fo_, not _to_, where
      _fo_ is corruptly written for _for_, as in l. 1318; and the
      initial letter of the last syllable but one may be read as a
      Saxon _w_ (ƿ), not a thorn-letter (þ). It merely repeats the
      idea in ll. 497, 498.]

      [Footnote 27: Qu. mouth.]

      [Footnote 28: MS. she.]

      [Footnote 29: _So in_ MS. _Qu._ þe.]


[Headnote: HAVELOK IS TAKEN TO GRIM’S COTTAGE.]

  [Sidenote: Grim gags the child.]
    +Hwan grim hi{m} hauede faste bou{n}de{n},
    And siþe{n} in an eld cloth wnden
    A keuel of clutes, ful, un-wraste,
    Þat he [ne] mouthe speke, ne fnaste,                         548
    Hwere he wolde him bere or lede.
    Hwan he hauede don þat dede,
    Hwa{n}[30] þe swike him hauede hethede,[31]
    Þat he shulde him forth [lede]                               552
    And him drinchen in þe se;
    Þat forwarde makeden he.
  [Sidenote: He puts him in a bag, and takes him on his back.]
    In a poke, ful and blac,
    Sone he caste him on his bac,                                556
    Ant bar him hom to hise cleue,
    And bi-taucte hi{m} dame leue,
  [Sidenote: He puts him in charge of his wife.]
    And seyde, “wite þou þis knaue,
    Al-so thou with[31*] mi lif haue;                            560
    I shal dreinche{n} him i{n} þe se,
    For him shole we ben maked fre,
    Gold haue{n} ynou, and oþer fe;
    Þat hauet mi louerd bihote{n} me.”                           564

      [Footnote 30: We should rather read “_þan_.”]

      [Footnote 31: MS. he þede.]

      [Footnote 31* (from Emendations):
      “For _with_, Mr Garnett proposed to read _wilt_.”]


[Headnote: GRIM SEES THAT HAVELOK IS THE KING’S SON.]

  [Sidenote: She throws down Havelok violently.]
    +Hwan dame [leue] herde þat,
    Vp she stirte, and nouth ne sat,
    And caste þe knaue adoun so harde,
    Þat hise croune he þer crakede                               568
    Ageyn a gret ston, þer it lay:
    Þo hauelok micte sei, “weilawei!
    Þat eu{er}e was i kinges bern!”
    Þat him ne hauede grip or ern,                               572
    Leoun or wlf, wluine or bere,
    Or oþer best, þat wolde him dere.
  [Sidenote: The child lies there till midnight.]
    So lay þat child to middel nicth,
    Þat grim bad leue bringe{n} lict,                            576
    For to don on [him] his cloþes:
    “Ne the{n}keste nowt of mine oþes
    Þat ich haue mi louerd swore{n}?
    Ne wile i nouth be forloren.                                 580
    I shal beren him to þe se,
    Þou wost þat [bi-]houes me;
    And i shal drenchen him þer-inne;
  [Sidenote: Grim tells his wife to light the fire and a candle.]
    Ris up swiþe, an go þu binne,                                584
    And blou þe fir, and lith a kandel:”
    Als she shulde hise cloþes handel
  [Sidenote: [Fol. 207, col. 2.]]
    On forto don, and blawe þe[32] fir,
  [Sidenote: She sees a light shining round the lad.]
    She saw þer-inne a lith ful shir,                            588
    Also brith so it were day,
    Aboute þe knaue þer he lay.
    Of hise mouth it stod a stem,
    Als it were a su{n}nebem;                                    592
    Also lith was it þer-inne,
    So þer brenden cerges i{n}ne:[33]
    “Ih{es}u cr{i}st!” wat dame leue,
    “Hwat is þat lith in vre cleue!                              596
  [Sidenote: She bids Grim come and see.]
    Sir[34] up grim, and loke wat it menes,
    Hwat is þe lith as þou wenes?”
    He stirte{n} boþe up to the knaue,
    For ma{n} shal god wille haue,                               600
    Vnkeuelede{n} him, and swiþe unbou{n}de{n},
  [Sidenote: They find a mark on his shoulder.]
    And sone anon [upon] him fu{n}den,
    Als he tirnede{n} of his serk,
    On his rith shuldre a kyne merk;                             604
    A swiþe brith, a swiþe fair:
    “Goddot!” quath grim, “þis [is] ure eir
    Þat shal [ben] louerd of denemark,
  [Sidenote: Grim says the lad is to be king.]
    He shal be{n} king strong and stark;                         608
    He shal haue{n} in his hand
    A[l] denemark and engeland;
    He shal do godard ful wo,
    He shal him hangen, or quik flo;                             612
    Or he shal him al quic g{ra}ue,
    Of him shal he no m{er}ci haue.”
    Þus seide grim, and sore gret,
    And sone fel him to þe fet,                                  616
  [Sidenote: He prays Havelok to forgive him.]
    And seide, “louerd, haue m{er}ci
    Of me, and leue, that is me bi!
    Louerd, we aren boþe þine,
    Þine cherles, þine hine.                                     620


[Headnote: GRIM AND HIS WIFE FEED HAVELOK.]

    Lowerd, we shole{n} þe wel fede,
    Til þat þu cone ride{n} on stede,
    Til þat þu cone ful wel bere
    Helm on heued, sheld and sp{er}e.                            624
  [Sidenote: Godard shall never know about this.]
    He ne shal neuere wite, sikerlike,
    Godard, þat fule swike.
    Þoru oþer ma{n}, louerd, tha{n} þoru þe,
    Sal i neu{er}e frema{n} be.                                  628
    Þou shalt me, louerd, fre make{n},
    For i shal yemen þe, and wake{n};
    Þoru þe wile i fredom haue:”
  [Sidenote: [Fol. 207b, col. 1.]]
    Þo was haueloc a bliþe knaue.                                632
  [Sidenote: Havelok is glad, and asks for bread.]
    He sat him up, and crauede bred.
    And seide, “ich am [wel] ney ded,
    Hwat for hunger, wat for bondes
    Þat þu leidest on min hondes;                                636
    And for [þe] keuel at þe laste,
    Þat in mi mouth was þrist faste.
    y was þe[r]-with so harde prangled,
    Þat i was þe[r]-with ney[e][34*] strangled.”                 640
    “Wel is me þat þu mayth hete:
  [Sidenote: Dame Leve brings him bread and cheese, butter, &c.]
    Goddoth!” quath leue, “y shal þe fete
    Bred an chese, butere and milk,
    Pastees and flaunes, al with suilk                           644
    Shole we sone þe wel fede,
    Louerd, in þis mikel nede,
    Soth it is, þ{a}t me{n} seyt and suereth:
    ‘Þer god wile helpe{n}, nouth no dereth.’”                   648

      [Footnote 32: MS. þer.]

      [Footnote 33: _Qu._ þrinne. See ll. 716, 761, 2125.]

      [Footnote 34: _Qu._ stir, _or_ stirt.]

      [Footnote 34*: Changed by editor from “ney”: see Emendations.]


[Headnote: GRIM SAYS HE HAS DROWNED HAVELOK.]

    +Þa{n}ne sho hauede brouth þe mete,
  [Sidenote: Havelok eats all up greedily.]
    Haueloc anon biga{n} to ete
    Grundlike, and was ful bliþe;
    Couþe he nouth his hunger Miþe.                              652
    A lof he het, y woth, and more,
    For him hungrede swiþe sore.
    Þre dayes þer-biforn, i wene,
    Et he no mete, þat was wel sene.                             656
    Hwan he hauede eten, and was fed,
  [Sidenote: Grim puts him to bed.]
    Grim dede make{n} a ful fayr bed;
    Vncloþede him, and dede hi{m} þer-i{n}ne,
    And seyde, “Slep[34**] sone, with michel wi{n}ne;            660
    Slep wel faste, and dred þe nouth,
    Fro sorwe to ioie art þu brouth.”
    Sone so it was lith of day,
  [Sidenote: Grim tells Godard he has killed Havelok,
  and asks for his reward.]
    Grim it under-tok þe wey                                     664
    To þe wicke traitour godard,
    Þat was denemak a[35] stiward,
    And seyde, “louerd, don ich haue
    Þat þou me bede of þe knaue;                                 668
    He is drenched i{n} þe flod,
    Aboute{n} his hals an anker god;
    He is witer-like ded,
    Eteth he neure more bred;                                    672
    He liþ drenched in þe se:--
    Yif me gold [and] oþer fe,[36]
    Þat y mowe riche be;
    And with þi chartre make [me] fre,                           676
  [Sidenote: [Fol. 207b, col. 2.]]
    For þu ful wel bi-hetet me,
    Þa{n}ne i last[e] spak with þe.”
  [Sidenote: Godard bids him go home, and remain a thrall;
  for he has done wickedly.]
    Godard stod, and lokede on him
    Þoruth-like, with eyne grim;                                 680
    And seyde, “Wiltu [nou] ben erl?
    Go hom swiþe, fule drit, cherl;
    Go heþen, and be euere-more
    Þral and cherl, als þou er wore.                             684
    Shal [þou] haue non oþer mede;
    For litel i [shal][37] do þe lede
    To þe galues, so god me rede!
    For þou haues don a wicke dede.                              688
    Þou Mait stonde{n} her to longe,
    Bute þou swiþe eþen gonge.”

      [Footnote 34** (from Emendations):
      “Perhaps there should be a comma after _Slep_, making the
      sense to be _sleep, son_, not _sleep soon_.”]

      [Footnote 35: _Qu._ Denemarkes.]

      [Footnote 36: Cf. l. 1225.]

      [Footnote 37: The MS. has “ig,” but the _g_ is expuncted; and
      it omits “shal.”]


[Headnote: GRIM SETS SAIL FOR ENGLAND.]

  [Sidenote: Grim fears that both himself and Havelok
  will be hung.]
    +Grim thoucte to late þat he ran
    Fro þat t{ra}ytour, þa wicke man;                            692
    And þoucte, “wat shal me to rede?
    Wite he him onliue, he wile beþe
    Heye hangen on galwe-tre:
    Betere us is of londe to fle,                                696
    And berwen boþen ure liues,
    And mine childre{n}, and mine wiues.”
  [Sidenote: Grim sells his live stock.]
    Grim solde sone al his corn,
    Shep wit wolle, neth wit horn,                               700
    Hors, and swin, [and gate] wit berd,
    Þe gees, þe he{n}nes of þe yerd;
    Al he solde, þat outh douthe,
    That he eure selle moucte,                                   704
    And al he to þe peni drou:
  [Sidenote: He fits up his ship carefully.]
    Hise ship he g{re}yþede wel inow,
    He dede it tere, an ful wel pike,
    Þat it ne doutede sond ne krike;                             708
    Þer-inne dide a ful god mast,
    Stronge kables, and ful fast,
    Ores god, an ful god seyl,
    Þer-i{n}ne wantede nouth a nayl,                             712
    Þat eu{er}e he sholde þer-i{n}ne do:
  [Sidenote: He takes with him his wife, his three sons,
  his two daughters, and Havelok.]
    Hwan he hauedet greyþed so,
    Hauelok þe yunge he dide þer-inne,
    Him and his wif, hise sones þrinne,                          716
    And hise two doutres, þat faire wore,
    And sone dede he leyn in an ore,
    And drou him to þe heye se,
    Þere he mith alþer-best[e] fle.                              720
    Fro londe wore{n} he bote a mile,
  [Sidenote: [Fol. 208, col. 1.]]
    Ne were neuere but ane hwile,
  [Sidenote: A north wind arises, called the _bise_,
  and drives them to England.]
    Þat it ne bigan a wind to Rise
    Out of þe north, me{n} calleth ‘bise’                        724
    And drof he{m} intil engelond,
    Þat al was siþen in his hond,
    His, þat hauelok was þe name;
    But or he hauede michel shame,                               728
    Michel sorwe, and michel tene,
    And þrie he gat it al bidene;
    Als ye shule{n} nou forthwar lere,[38]
    Yf that ye wile{n} þer-to here.                              732

      [Footnote 38: MS. here; _read_ lere. Cf. ll. 12, 1640.]


[Headnote: GRIM FOUNDS THE TOWN OF GRIMSBY.]

  [Sidenote: Grim went up the Humber to Lindesey.]
    +IN humb{er} grim biga{n} to lende,
    In lindeseye, Rith at þe north ende.
    Þer sat is ship up-on þe sond,
    But grim it drou up to þe lond;                              736
    And þere he made a litel cote,
    To him and to hise flote.
    Biga{n} he þere for to erþe,
    A litel hus to maken of erþe,                                740
  [Sidenote: There he built a house.]
    So þat he wel þore were
    Of here herboru h{er}borwed þere;
    And for þat grim þat place aute,
    Þe stede of grim þe name laute;                              744
  [Sidenote: That place was called Grimsby, after Grim.]
    So þat [hit] grimesbi calleth alle
    Þat þer-offe speken alle,[38*]
    And so shule{n} me{n} calle{n} it ay,
    Bituene þis and domesday.                                    748

      [Footnote 38* (from Emendations):
      “For _alle_, Mr Garnett proposed to read _shalle_.”]


[Headnote: HAVELOK DOES NOT LIKE BEING IDLE.]

  [Sidenote: Grim was a good fisherman.]
    +Grim was fishere swiþe god,
    And mikel couþe on the flod;
    Mani god fish þer-inne he tok,
    Boþe with neth, and with hok.                                752
  [Sidenote: He caught sturgeons, turbot, &c.]
    He tok þe sturgiun, and þe qual,
    And þe turbut, and lax with-al,
    He tok þe sele, and þe hwel;
    He spedde ofte swiþe wel:                                    756
    Keling he tok, and tu{m}berel,
    Hering, and þe makerel,
    Þe Butte, þe schulle, þe þornebake:
  [Sidenote: He had four panniers made for himself and his sons.]
    Gode paniers dede he make                                    760
    Ontil him, and oþer þrinne,
    Til hise sones to bere{n} fish inne,
    Vp o-londe to selle and fonge;
    Forbar he neyþe[r] tun, ne gronge,                           764
    Þat he ne to-yede with his ware;
    Kam he neu{er}e hom hand-bare,
  [Sidenote: [Fol. 208, col. 2.]]
    Þat he ne broucte bred and sowel,
    In his shirte, or in his couel;                              768
    In his poke benes and korn:--
    Hise swink ne hauede he nowt forlorn.
  [Sidenote: He used to sell lampreys at Lincoln,
  and bring home simnels, meal, meat, and hemp.]
    And hwan he tok þe grete laumprei,
    Ful we[l] he couþe þe rithe wei                              772
    To lincolne, þe gode boru;
    Ofte he yede it þoru and þoru,
    Til he hauede wol[39] wel sold,
    And þer-fore þe penies told.                                 776
    Þa{n}ne he com, þe{n}ne he were bliþe,
    For hom he brouthe fele siþe
    Wastels, simenels with þe horn,
    Hise pokes fulle of mele an korn,                            780
    Netes flesh, shepes, and swines,
    And hemp to make{n} of gode lines;
    And stronge ropes to hise netes,
    In þe se were{n} he ofte setes.[40, 40*]                     784

      [Footnote 39: _Qu._ ful _or_ al.]

      [Footnote 40: _Sic_ in MS.]

      [Footnote 40* (from Emendations: see also Errata)
      “Perhaps we should, however, read _se-weren_, and the note
      on the line may be wrong. See _Weren_ in the Glossary.”]


[Headnote: HAVELOK SELLS FISH LIKE THE BEST.]

  [Sidenote: Thus they lived for 12 years.]
    +Þus-gate grim him fayre ledde.
    Him and his genge wel he fedde
    Wel twelf wint{er}, oþer more:
    Hauelok was war þat gri{m} swa{n}k sore                      788
  [Sidenote: Havelok thinks he eats too much to be idle.]
    For his mete, and he lay at hom:
    Thouthe, “ich am nou no grom;
    Ich am wel waxe{n}, and wel may ete{n}
    More þa{n} euere Grim may geten.                             792
    Ich ete more, bi god on liue,
    Þan grim an hise children fiue!
    It ne may nouth ben þus lo{n}ge,
    Goddot! y wile with þe gange,                                796
    For to leren su{m} god to gete;
    Swinken ich wolde for mi mete.
  [Sidenote: It is no shame for a man to work.]
    It is no shame forto swinken;
    Þe ma{n} þat may wel ete{n} and dri{n}ke{n},                 800
    Þat nouth ne haue but on swi{n}k lo{n}g,
    To ligge{n} at hom it is ful strong.
    God yelde him þer i ne[41] may,
    Þat haueth me fed to þis day!                                804
  [Sidenote: He determines to carry about panniers like the rest.]
    Gladlike i wile þe paniers bere;
    Ich woth, ne shal it me nouth dere,
    Þey þer be i{n}ne a birþene gret,
    Al so heui als a neth.                                       808
    Shal ich neuere lengere dwelle,
    To morwe{n} shal ich forth pelle.”

      [Footnote 41: MS. ine.]


[Headnote: HAVELOK GOES TO LINCOLN TO GET WORK.]

    +On þe morwen, hwa{n} it was day,
  [Sidenote: [Fol. 208b, col. 1.]]
    He stirt up sone, and nouth ne lay;                          812
  [Sidenote: He carries a pannier full of fish, and sells them.]
    And cast a panier on his bac,
    With fish giueled als a stac;
    Also michel he bar him one,
    So he foure, bi mine mone![42]                               816
    Wel he it bar, and solde it wel,
    Þe siluer he brouthe hom il del;
    Al þat he þer-fore tok
    With-held he nouth a ferþinges nok.                          820
    So yede he forth ilke day,
    Þat he neuere at home lay.
    So wolde he his mester lere;
  [Sidenote: A great dearth arises.]
    Bifel it so a strong dere                                    824
    Bigan to rise of korn of bred,
    That grim ne couþe no god red,
    Hw he sholde his meine fede;
    Of hauelok hauede he michel drede:                           828
    For he was strong, and wel mouthe ete
    More þa{n}ne heuere mouthe he gete;
  [Sidenote: They have not enough to eat.]
    Ne he ne mouthe on þe se take
    Neyþer le{n}ge, ne þorn[e]bake,[43]                          832
    Ne non oþer fish þat douthe
    His meyne fede{n} with he[r][44] mouthe.
  [Sidenote: Grim is sorry for Havelok.]
    Of hauelok he hauede kare,
    Hwilgat þat he micthe fare;                                  836
    Of his childre{n} was him nouth,
    On hauelok was al hise þouth,
    And seyde, “hauelok, dere sone,
    I wene that we deye mone                                     840
    For hu{n}ger, þis dere is so strong,
    And hure mete is uten long.
  [Sidenote: He advises him to go to Lincoln, and work there.]
    Betere is þat þu he{n}ne gonge,
    Þan þu here dwelle longe;                                    844
    Heþen þow mayt ga{n}ge{n} to late;
    Thou canst ful wel þe ricthe gate
    To lincolne, þe gode borw,
    Þou hauest it gon ful ofte þoru;                             848
    Of me ne is me nouth a slo,
    Bet{er}e is þat þu þider go,
    For þer is mani god ma{n} inne,
    Þer þou mayt þi mete winne.                                  852
    But wo is me! þou art so naked,
  [Sidenote: He makes him a coat of an old sail.]
    Of mi seyl y wolde þe were maked
    A cloth, þou mithest i{n}ne gongen,
    Sone, no cold þat þu ne fonge.”                              856


[Headnote: HE HELPS THE EARL OF CORNWALL’S COOK.]

  [Sidenote: [Fol. 208b. col. 2.]]
    +He tok þe sh[e]res[45] of þe nayl,
    And made him a couel of þe sayl,
    And hauelok dide it sone on;
    Hauede neyþer hosen ne shon,                                 860
    Ne none kines oþe[r] wede;
  [Sidenote: Havelok goes to Lincoln barefoot.]
    To lincolne barfot he yede.
    Hwan he kam þe[r], he was ful wil,
    Ne hauede he no frend to gange{n} til;                       864
  [Sidenote: He fasts for two days.]
    Two dayes þer fastinde he yede,
    Þat non for his werk wolde him fede;
    Þe þridde day herde he calle:
    “Bermen, bermen, hider forth alle!”                          868
    [Poure þat on fote yede][46]
    Sprongen forth so sparke on glede.
  [Sidenote: Havelok becomes the earl’s cook’s porter.]
    Hauelok shof dun nyne or ten,
    Rith amidewarde þe fen,                                      872
    And stirte forth to þe kok,
    [Þer the herles mete he tok,]
    Þat he bouthe at þe brigge:
    Þe berme{n} let he alle ligge,                               876
    And bar þe mete to þe castel,
  [Sidenote: He gets a farthing cake.]
    And gat him þere a ferþing wastel.

      [Footnote 42: Cf. ll. 1711, 1972.]

      [Footnote 43: See l. 759.]

      [Footnote 44: _Qu._ her, _i.e._ their. MS. he.]

      [Footnote 45: _Qu._ sheres. MS. shres.]

      [Footnote 46: Cf. ll. 91, 101. Here and below an additional
      line seems requisite.]


[Headnote: HAVELOK IS HIRED BY THE EARL’S COOK.]

  [Sidenote: Another day, he watches the earl’s cook,
  who calls for a porter.]
    +Þet oþer day kepte he ok
    Swiþe yerne þe erles kok,                                    880
    Til þat he say him on þe b[r]igge,
    And bi him mani fishes ligge.
    Þe herles mete hauede he bouth
    Of cornwalie, and kalde oft:                                 884
    “Berme{n}, bermen, hider swiþe!”
    Hauelok it herde, and was ful bliþe,
    Þat he herde “berme{n}” calle;
    Alle made he hem dun falle                                   888
  [Sidenote: Havelok upsets 16 lads.]
    Þat in his gate yeden and stode,
    Wel sixtene laddes gode.
    Als he lep þe kok [vn-]til,
    He shof hem alle upon an hyl;                                892
    Astirte til him with his rippe,
  [Sidenote: He catches up the cook’s fish, and carries them
  to the castle.]
    And bigan þe fish to kippe.
    He bar up wel a carte lode
    Of segges, laxes, of playces brode,                          896
    Of grete laumprees, and of eles;
    Sparede he neyþer tos ne heles,
    Til þat he to þe castel cam,
    Þat me{n} fro him his birþene nam.                           900
    Þan me{n} hauede{n} holpe{n} him doun
    With þe birþene of his croun,
    Þe kok [bi] stod, and on him low,
  [Sidenote: [Fol. 209, col. 1.]]
    And þoute him stalworþe ma{n} ynow,                          904
    And seyde, “wiltu ben wit me?
  [Sidenote: The cook takes him into his service.]
    Gladlike wile ich feden þe;
    Wel is set þe mete þu etes,
    And þe hire þat þu getes.”                                   908


[Headnote: HE CUTS WOOD, AND DRAWS WATER.]

    +“Goddot!”[47] quoth he, “leue sire,
    Bidde ich you non oþer hire;
    But yeueþ me inow to ete,
  [Sidenote: Havelok tells the cook what he can do.]
    Fir and wat{er} y wile yow fete,                             912
    Þe fir blowe, an ful wele make{n};
    Stickes kan ich breken and krake{n},
    And kindlen ful wel a fyr,
    And make{n} it to brennen shir;                              916
    Ful wel kan ich cleue{n} shides,
    Eles to-turnen[48] of here hides;
    Ful wel kan ich dishes swilen,
    And don al þat ye eu{er}e wilen.”                            920
  [Sidenote: The cook is content to hire him.]
    Quoth þe kok, “wile i no more;
    Go þu yunder, and sit þore,
    And y shal yeue þe ful fair bred,
    And make þe broys i{n} þe led.                               924
    Sit now doun and et ful yerne:
    Daþeit hwo þe mete werne!”

      [Footnote 47: Soddot, MS.]

      [Footnote 48: MS. to turuen; _but the _u_ and _n_ are almost
      indistinguishable._ Cf. l. 603; and _William of Palerne_,
      2590.]


[Headnote: HAVELOK GROWS VERY TALL AND STRONG.]

  [Sidenote: Havelok eats a good dinner.]
    +Hauelok sette him dun anon,
    Also stille als a ston,                                      928
    Til he hauede ful wel eten;
    Þo hauede hauelok fayre gete{n}.
  [Sidenote: He fills a large tub with water for the kitchen.]
    Hwa{n} he hauede ete{n} inow,
    He ka{m} to þe welle, wat{er} up-drow,                       932
    And filde þe[r] a michel so;
    Bad he non ageyn him go,
    But bi-twen his hondes he bar it in,
    A[l] him one to þe kichin.                                   936
    Bad he non him wat{er} to fete,
    Ne fro b[r]igge to bere þe mete,
    He bar þe turues, he bar þe star,
    Þe wode fro the brigge he bar;                               940
  [Sidenote: He draws water, and cuts wood.]
    Al that euere shulde{n} he nytte,
    Al he drow, and al he citte;
    Wolde he neu{er}e haue{n} rest,
    More þa{n} he were a best.                                   944
  [Sidenote: He is always laughing and blithe.]
    Of alle me{n} was he mest meke,
    Lauhwinde ay, and bliþe of speke;
    Eu{er}e he was glad and bliþe,
    His sorwe he couþe ful wel miþe.                             948
  [Sidenote: [Fol. 209, col. 2.]]
    It ne was non so litel knaue,
    For to leyken, ne forto plawe,
    Þat he ne wo[l]de with him pleye:
    Þe children that y[e]de{n} in þe weie                        952
  [Sidenote: Children play with him.]
    Of him he deden al he[r] wille,
    And with him leykeden here fille.
    Him louede{n} alle, stille and bolde,
    Knictes, childre{n}, yunge and holde;                        956
  [Sidenote: All like him.]
    Alle him louede{n} þat him sowen,
    Boþen heyemen and lowe.
    Of him ful wide þe word sprong,
    Hw he was mike, hw he was stro{n}g,                          960
    Hw fayr ma{n} god him hauede maked,
  [Sidenote: He has nothing to wear but the old sail.]
    But on þat he was almest naked:
    For he ne hauede nouth to shride,
    But a kouel ful unride,                                      964
    Þat [was] ful, and swiþe wicke,
    Was it nouth worth a fir sticke.
  [Sidenote: The cook buys him new clothes.]
    Þe cok biga{n} of him to rewe,
    And bouthe him cloþes, al spa{n}newe;                        968
    He bouthe him boþe hose{n} and shon,
    And sone dide him dones on.
  [Sidenote: He looks very well in his new suit.]
    Hwan he was cloþed, osed, and shod,
    Was no{n} so fayr under god,                                 972
    Þat euere yete in erþe were,
    Non þat eu{er}e moder bere;
    It was neu{er}e ma{n} þat yemede
    In kinneriche, þat so wel semede                             976
    King or cayser forto be,
    Þan he was shrid, so semede he;
  [Sidenote: Havelok is the tallest man in Lincoln,
  and the strongest in England.]
    For þa{n}ne he weren alle same{n}
    At lincolne, at þe game{n},                                  980
    And þe erles men woren al þore,
    Þan was hauelok bi þe shuldre{n} more
    Þan þe meste þat þer kam:
    In armes him noma{n} [ne] nam,                               984
    Þat he doune sone ne caste;
    Hauelok stod ouer he{m} als a mast.
    Als he was heie, al[49] he was long,
    He was boþe stark and strong;                                988
    In engelond [was] non hise per
    Of strengþe þat eu{er}e ka{m} him ner.
    Als he was strong, so was he softe;

[Headnote: HE SEES SOME MEN “PUTTING THE STONE.”]

    Þey a man him misdede ofte,                                  992
    Neuere more he him misdede,
  [Sidenote: [Fol. 209b, col. 1.]]
    Ne hond on him with yuele leyde.
  [Sidenote: He is good-natured and pure.]
    Of bodi was he mayden clene,
    Neuere yete in game, ne in grene,                            996
    Þit[50] hire ne wolde leyke ne lye,
    No more þan it were a strie.
    In þat time al hengelond
  [Sidenote: Godrich summons a parliament at Lincoln.]
    Þerl Godrich hauede in his hond,                            1000
    And he gart kome{n} i{n}to þe tun
    Mani erl, and mani barun;
    And alle [men] þat liues were
    In eng[e]lond, þa{n}ne wer þere,                            1004
    Þat þey haueden after sent,
    To ben þer at þe parleme{n}t.
  [Sidenote: Some champions begin to contend in games.]
    With hem com mani cha{n}bioun,
    Mani with ladde, blac and brown;                            1008
    An fel it so, þat yunge men,
    Wel aboute{n} nine or ten,
    Bigu{n}ne{n} þe[r] for to layke:
    Þider kome{n} bothe stro{n}ge and wayke;                    1012
    Þider kome{n} lesse and more,
    Þat in þe borw þa{n}ne were{n} þore;
  [Sidenote: Strong lads and bondmen are there.]
    Chaunpiouns, and starke laddes,
    Bondeme{n} with here gaddes,                                1016
    Als he comen fro þe plow;
    Þere was sembling i-now!
    For it ne was non horse-knaue,
    Þo þei sholden in honde haue,                               1020
    Þat he ne kam þider, þe leyk to se:
    Biforn here fet þa{n}ne lay a tre,
  [Sidenote: They begin to “put the stone.”]
    And putte{n}[51] with a mikel ston
    Þe starke laddes, ful god won.                              1024

[Headnote: HE “PUTS THE STONE” FURTHER THAN ANY.]

    Þe ston was mikel, and ek greth,
    And al so heui so a neth;
    Grund stalwrthe ma{n} he sholde be,
    Þat mouthe lifte{n} it to his kne;                          1028
  [Sidenote: Few can lift it.]
    Was þer neyþer clerc, ne prest,
    Þat mithe liften it to his brest:
    Þerwit putte{n} the chaunpiouns,
    Þat þider come{n} with þe barouns.                          1032
    Hwo so mithe putten þore
    Biforn a-noþer, an inch or more,
    Wore ye yung, [or] wore he hold,
    He was for a ke{m}pe told.                                  1036
  [Sidenote: Whilst this is going on, Havelok looks on at them.]
    Al-so þe[i] stoden, an ofte starede{n},[51*]
    Þe chaunpiouns, and ek the ladde{n},
  [Sidenote: [Fol. 209b, col. 2.]]
    And he maden mikel strout
    Abouten þe alþerbeste but,                                  1040
    Hauelok stod, and lokede þer-til;
    And of putti{n}gge he was ful wil,
    For neu{er}e yete ne saw he or
    Putte{n} the stone, or þa{n}ne þor.                         1044
  [Sidenote: His master tells him to try.]
    Hise mayst{er} bad him gon þer-to,
    Als he couþe þer-with do.
    Þo hise mayst{er} it him bad,
    He was of him sore adrad;                                   1048
    Þerto he stirte sone anon,
    And kipte up þat heui ston,
    Þat he sholde puten wiþe;
  [Sidenote: He puts the stone 12 feet beyond the rest.]
    He putte at þe firste siþe,                                 1052
    Ouer alle þat þer wore,
    Twel fote, and su{m}del more.
    Þe chaunpiouns þat [þat] put sowen,
    Shuldrede{n} he ilc oþer, and lowen;                        1056
    Wolde{n} he no more to putti{n}g gange,
    But seyde, “_w_e[52] dwelle{n} her to longe!”

[Headnote: GODRICH HEARS OF HAVELOK’S STRENGTH.]

  [Sidenote: This feat is everywhere talked about.]
    Þis selkouth mithe nouth be{n} hyd,
    Ful sone it was ful loude kid                               1060
    Of hauelok, hw he warp þe ston
    Ouer þe laddes euerilkon;
    Hw he was fayr, hw he was long,
    Hw he was with, hw he was stro{n}g;                         1064
    Þoruth england yede þe speke,[53]
    Hw he was strong, and ek meke;
    In the castel, up in þe halle,
    Þe knithes speke{n} þer-of alle,                            1068
  [Sidenote: Godrich hears the knights talking of it.]
    So that Godrich it herde wel
    Þe[r] speke{n} of hauelok, eueri del,
    Hw he was stro{n}g man and hey,
    Hw he was stro{n}g and ek fri,                              1072
    And þouthte godrich, “þoru þis knaue
    Shal ich engelond al haue,
    And mi sone after me;
    For so i wile þat it be.                                    1076
  [Sidenote: “Athelwold said I was to marry his daughter
  to the strongest man alive.]
    The king aþelwald me dide swere
    Vpon al þe messe-gere,
    Þat y shu[l]de his douthe[r] yeue
    Þe hexte [man][53*] þat mithe liue,                         1080
    Þe beste, þe fairest, þe stra{n}gest ok;
    Þat gart he me swere{n} on þe bok.
    Hwere mithe i finden ani so hey
  [Sidenote: [Fol. 210, col. 1.]]
    So hauelok is, or so sley?                                  1084
    Þou y southe heþen in-to ynde,
    So fayr, so strong, ne mithe y finde.
    Hauelok is þat ilke knaue,
    Þat shal goldeborw haue.”                                   1088
  [Sidenote: That is Havelok.”]
    Þis þouthe [he] with trechery,
    With t{ra}ysoun, and wit felony;
    For he wende, þat hauelok wore
    Sum cherles sone, and no more;                              1092
    Ne shulde he haue{n} of engellond
    Onlepi forw in his hond,
    With hire, þat was þerof eyr,
    Þat boþe was god and swiþe fair.                            1096
  [Sidenote: He thought Havelok was only a thrall.]
    He wende, þat hauelok wer a þral,
    Þer-þoru he we{n}de haue{n} al
    In engelond, þat hire rith was;
    He was werse þan sathanas,                                  1100
    Þat ih{es}u c{ri}st in erþe shop:[54]
    Hanged worþe he on an hok!

      [Footnote 49: _Qu._ so; see l. 991.]

      [Footnote 50: _Qu._ wit = with: miswritten owing to confusion
      of þ with ƿ (_w_)?]

      [Footnote 51: MS. pulten. But see ll. 1031, 1033, 1044, 1051,
      &c.]

      [Footnote 51* (from Emendations):
      “For _stareden_ we should perhaps read _stradden_; see the
      Glossary.”]

      [Footnote 52: In the former edition-- “ye”. But the _y_ is not
      dotted, and it may be “ƿe.”]

      [Footnote 53: MS. speche. Read “speke,” as in l. 946.]

      [Footnote 53*: Word added by editor: see Emendations.]

      [Footnote 54: _Qu._ shok _or_ strok.]


[Headnote: GOLDBOROUGH IS SENT FOR TO LINCOLN.]

  [Sidenote: He sends for Goldborough to Lincoln.]
    +After goldebo[r]w sone he sende,
    Þat was boþe fayr and hende,                                1104
    And dide hire to lincolne bringe,
    Belles dede he ageyn hire ringen,
    And ioie he made hire swiþe mikel,
    But neþeles he was ful swikel.                              1108
    He seyde, þat he sholde hire yeue
    Þe fayrest ma{n} that mithe liue.
  [Sidenote: She says she will marry none but a king.]
    She answerede, and seyde anon,
    Bi crist, and bi seint iohan,                               1112
    Þat hire sholde noma{n} wedde,
    Ne noma{n} bringen to hire[55] bedde,
    But he were king, or ki{n}ges eyr,
    Were he neuere ma{n} so fayr.                               1116

      [Footnote 55: _Qu._ hise.]


[Headnote: GODRICH ASKS HAVELOK IF HE WILL MARRY.]

  [Sidenote: Godrich is wrath at this.]
    +Godrich þe erl was swiþe wroth,
    Þat she swore swilk an oth,
    And seyde, “hwor þou wilt be
    Quen and leuedi ouer me?                                    1120
    Þou shalt haue{n} a gadeling,
    Ne shalt þou haue{n} non oþer ki{n}g;
  [Sidenote: He says she shall marry his cook’s servant.]
    Þe shal spusen mi cokes knaue,
    Ne shalt þou non oþer lou{er}d haue.                        1124
    Daþeit þat þe oþer yeue
    Eu{er}e more hwil i liue!
    To-mo[r]we ye shole{n} ben weddeth,
    And, maugre þin, to-gidere beddeth.”                        1128
  [Sidenote: [Fol. 210, col. 2.]]
    Goldeborw gret, and _w_as[56] hire ille,
    She wolde ben ded bi hire wille.
    On the morwen, hwa{n} day was spru{n}ge{n},
    And day-belle at kirke rungen,                              1132
  [Sidenote: He sends next day for Havelok, and says,
  “Master, wilt wive?”]
    After hauelok sente þat iudas,
    Þat werse was þa{n}ne sathanas:
    And seyde, “mayst{er}, wilte wif?”
    “Nay,” quoth, hauelok, “bi my lif!                          1136
    Hwat sholde ich with wif do?
    I ne may hire fede, ne cloþe, ne sho.
    Wider sholde ich wimma{n} bringe?
  [Sidenote: Havelok refuses.]
    I ne haue none kines þinge.                                 1140
    I ne haue hws, y ne haue cote,
    Ne i ne[57] haue stikke, y ne haue sprote,
    I ne haue neyþer bred ne sowel,
    Ne cloth, but of an hold with couel.                        1144
    Þis cloþes, þat ich onne haue,
    Aren þe kokes, and ich his knaue.”
  [Sidenote: Godrich beats him, and threatens to hang him.]
    Godrich stirt up, and on him dong
    [With dintes swiþe hard and strong,]                        1148
    And seyde, “But þou hire take,
    Þat y wole yeue{n} þe to make,
    I shal hange{n} þe ful heye,
    Or y shal þristen vth þin heie.”                            1152
    Hauelok was one, and was odrat,
  [Sidenote: Havelok consents.]
    And grauntede hi{m} al þat he bad.
    Þo sende he after hire sone,
    Þe fayrest wymman under mone;                               1156
    And seyde til hire, [false][58] and slike,
  [Sidenote: Godrich next threatens Goldborough.]
    Þat wicke þral, þat foule swike:
    “But þu þis ma{n} under-stonde,
    I shal fleme{n} þe of londe;                                1160
    Or þou shal to þe galwes re{n}ne,
    And þer þou shalt i{n} a fir bre{n}ne.”
    Sho was adrad, for he so þrette,
    And durste nouth þe spusi{n}g lette,                        1164
    But þey hire likede swiþe ille,
  [Sidenote: She consents, thinking it is God’s will.]
    Þouthe it was godes wille:
    God, þat makes to growe{n} þe korn,
    Formede hire wi{m}ma{n} to be born.                         1168
    Hwan he hauede don him for drede,
    Þat he sholde hire spuse{n}, and fede,
    And þat she sholde til him holde,
  [Sidenote: A dowry is given her.]
    Þer were{n} penies þicke tolde,                             1172
    Mikel plente upon þe bok:
    He ys hire yaf, and she as tok.
  [Sidenote: [Fol. 210b, col. 1.]]
    He weren spused fayre and wel,
    Þe messe he deden eueridel,                                 1176
    Þat fel to spusing, and god cle[r]k,
  [Sidenote: The archbishop of York marries them.]
    Þe erchebishop uth of yerk,
    Þat kam to þe p{ar}leme{n}t,
    Als god him hauede þider sent.                              1180

      [Footnote 56: The first letter of this word is either _þ_ or a
      Saxon _w_ (ƿ). I read it as the latter.]

      [Footnote 57: MS. ine.]

      [Footnote 58: Both sense and metre require this word.]


[Headnote: HAVELOK RESOLVES TO GO TO GRIMSBY.]

    +Hwan he were{n} togydere i{n} godes lawe,
    Þat þe folc ful wel it sawe,
    He ne wiste{n} hwat he mouthe{n},
  [Sidenote: Havelok knows not what to do.]
    Ne he ne wiste{n} wat hem douthe;                           1184
    Þer to dwelle{n}, or þe{n}ne to gonge,
    Þer ne wolde{n} he dwelle{n} lo{n}ge,
    For he wiste{n}, and ful wel sawe,
    Þat godrich he{m} hatede, þe deuel hi{m} hawe!              1188
    And yf he dwellede{n} þer outh--
    Þat fel hauelok ful wel on þouth--
    Men sholde don his leman shame,
    Or elles bringe{n} i{n} wicke blame.                        1192
    Þat were him leuere to ben ded,
  [Sidenote: He determines to go to Grimsby.]
    For-þi he toke{n} anoþer red,

[Headnote: GRIM’S CHILDREN WELCOME HAVELOK.]

    Þat þei sholden þenne fle
    Til grim, and til hise sones þre;                           1196
    Þer we{n}den he alþer-best to spede,
    Hem forto cloþe, and for to fede.
    Þe lond he token under fote,
    Ne wisten he non oþer bote,                                 1200
    And helden ay the riþe [sti][59]
    Til he kome{n} to grimesby.
  [Sidenote: He finds that Grim is dead, but his five children
  are alive.]
    Þanne he kome{n} þere, þanne was gri{m} ded,
    Of him ne hauede{n} he no red;                              1204
    But hise childre{n} alle fyue
    Alle weren yet on liue;
    Þat ful fayre ayen he{m} neme,
    Hwan he wiste{n} þat he keme,                               1208
    And made{n} ioie swiþe mikel,
    Ne were{n} he neuere ayen he{m} fikel.
    On knes ful fayre he hem setten,
    And hauelok swiþe fayre grette{n},                          1212
  [Sidenote: They welcome Havelok very kindly.]
    And seyde{n}, “welkome, louerd dere!
    And welkome be þi fayre fere!
    Blessed be þat ilke þrawe,
    Þat þou hire toke in godes lawe!                            1216
    Wel is hus we sen þe on lyue,
    Þou mithe us boþe selle and yeue;
    Þou mayt us boþe yeue and selle,
  [Sidenote: [Fol. 210b, col. 2.]]
    With þat þou wilt here dwelle.                              1220
    We haue{n}, louerd, alle gode,
  [Sidenote: They beg him to stay with them.]
    Hors, and neth, and ship on flode,
    Gold, and siluer, and michel auchte,
    Þat grim ute fader us bitawchte.                            1224
    Gold, and siluer, and oþer fe
    Bad he us bi-taken þe.
    We hauen shep, we hauen swin,
    Bi-leue her, louerd, and al be þin;                         1228
  [Sidenote: They will serve him and his wife.]
    Þo shalt ben louerd, þou shalt be{n} syre,
    And we sholen s{er}ue{n} þe and hire;
    And hure sistres shole{n} do
    Al that euere biddes sho;                                   1232
    He shole{n} hire cloþe{n},[59*] washe{n}, and wri{n}ge{n},
    And to hondes water bringe{n};
    He sholen bedde{n} hire and þe,
    For leuedi wile we þat she be.”                             1236
    Hwan he þis ioie hauede{n} maked,
    Sithen stikes broke{n} and kraked,
  [Sidenote: They make a fire, and spare neither goose nor hen.]
    And þe fir brouth on bre{n}ne,
    Ne was þer spared gos ne he{n}ne,                           1240
    Ne þe hende, ne þe drake,
    Mete he deden plente make;
    Ne wantede þere no god mete,
  [Sidenote: They fetch wine and ale.]
    Wyn and ale dede{n} he fete,                                1244
    And made[n] hem [ful] glade and bliþe,
    Wesseyl ledde{n} he fele siþe.

      [Footnote 59: A word is here erased; but see l. 2618.]

      [Footnote 59* (from Emendations):
      “Mr Garnett suggested that _cloþen_ may mean _clothes_. If so,
      dele the comma after it.”]


[Headnote: GOLDBOROUGH SEES THE WONDROUS LIGHT.]

  [Sidenote: At night Goldborough lies down sorrowful.]
    +On þe nith, als goldeborw lay,
    Sory and sorwful was she ay,                                1248
    For she wende she were bi-swike,
    Þat sh[e w]ere[60] yeue{n} un-kyndelike.
  [Sidenote: She sees a great light.]
    O nith saw she þer-inne a lith,
    A swiþe fayr, a swiþe bryth,                                1252
    Al so brith, al so shir,
    So it were a blase of fir.
    She lokede no[r]þ,[61] and ek south,
  [Sidenote: It comes out of Havelok’s mouth.]
    And saw it come{n} ut of his mouth,                         1256
    Þat lay bi hire in þe bed:
    No ferlike þou she were adred.
    Þouthe she, “wat may this bi-mene!
    He beth heyma{n} yet, als y wene,                           1260
    He beth heyma{n} er he be ded:”--
  [Sidenote: She sees a red cross on his shoulder,
  and hears an angel, saying,]
    On hise shuldre, of gold red
    She saw a swiþe noble croiz,
    Of an angel she herde a uoyz:                               1264

      [Footnote 60: MS. shere, _evidently miswritten for_ she were.]

      [Footnote 61: MS. noþ.]


  [Sidenote: [Fol. 211, col. 1.]]
  [Sidenote: “Goldborough, be not sad. Havelok shall be a king,
  and thou, queen.”]
    +“Goldeborw, lat þi sorwe be,
    For hauelok, þat haueþ spuset þe,
    He[62] kinges sone, and ki{n}ges eyr,
    Þat bike{n}neth þat croiz so fayr.                          1268
    It[63] bikenneth more, þat he shal
    Denemark haue{n}, and englond al;
    He shal ben king strong and stark
    Of engelond and denemark;                                   1272
    Þat shal þu wit þin eyne sen,
    And þo shalt quen and leuedi ben!”

      [Footnote 62: _Qu._ Is.]

      [Footnote 63: MS. Iit.]


[Headnote: HAVELOK TELLS HER HIS STRANGE DREAM.]

  [Sidenote: She rejoices, and kisses Havelok.]
    +Þanne she hauede herd the steuene
    Of þe angel uth of heuene,                                  1276
    She was so fele siþes blithe,
    Þat she ne mithe hire ioie mythe;
    But hauelok sone anon she kiste,
    And he slep, and nouth ne wiste.                            1280
    Hwan þat aungel hauede seyd,
  [Sidenote: He awakes, and says he has had a dream.]
    Of his slep a-non he brayd,
    And seide, “le{m}ma{n}, slepes þou?
    A selkuth drem dremede me nou.                              1284


[Headnote: SHE SAYS HAVELOK WILL BE A GREAT KING.]

    +Herkne nou hwat me haueth met:
  [Sidenote: He dreamt he was on a high hill in Denmark,
  and began to possess all that country.]
    Me þouthe y was i{n} denemark set,
    But on on þe moste hil
    Þat eu{er}e yete kam i til.                                 1288
    It was so hey, þat y wel mouthe
    Al þe werd se, als me þouthe.
    Als i sat up-on þat lowe,
    I bigan denemark for to awe,                                1292
    Þe borwes, and þe castles stronge;
    And mine armes were{n} so lo{n}ge,
    That i fadmede, al at ones,
    denemark, with mine lo{n}ge bones;                          1296
    And þa{n}ne y wolde mine armes drawe
    Til me, and hom for to haue,
  [Sidenote: All things in Denmark cleaved to his arms.]
    Al that euere in denemark liueden
    On mine armes faste clyueden;                               1300
    And þe stronge castles alle
    On knes bigunne{n} for to falle,
    Þe keyes felle{n} at mine fet:--
  [Sidenote: He also dreamt that he went to England,
  and that became his too.]
    Anoþer drem dremede me ek,                                  1304
    Þat ich fley ouer þe salte se
    Til engeland, and al with me
    Þat euere was in denemark lyues,
    But bo{n}deme{n}, and here wiues,                           1308
    And þat ich kom til engelond,
  [Sidenote: [Fol. 211, col. 2.]]
    Al closede it i{n}til min hond,
    And, goldeborw, y gaf [it] þe:--
    Deus! le{m}man, hwat may þis be?”                           1312
    Sho answerede, and seyde sone:
    “Ih{es}u c{ri}st, þat made mone,
    Þine dremes t{ur}ne to ioye;
    Þat wite þw that sittes i{n} trone!                         1316
  [Sidenote: She says, he will be king of England and Denmark.]
    Ne non stro{n}g ki{n}g, ne caysere,
    So þou shalt be, fo[r] þou shalt bere
    In engelond corune yet;
    Denemark shal knele to þi fet;                              1320
    Alle þe castles þat aren þer-inne,
    Shal-tow, le{m}man, ful wel winne.
    I woth, so wel so ich it sowe,
    To þe shole come{n} heye and lowe,                          1324
  [Sidenote: “All men in Denmark shall come to thee.]
    And alle þat in denemark wone,
    Em and broþer, fader and sone,
    Erl and baroun, dreng an kayn,
    Knithes, and burgeys, and sweyn;                            1328
    And mad king heyelike and wel,
    Denemark shal be þin euere-ilc del.
    Haue þou nouth þer-offe douthe
    Nouth þe worth, of one nouthe;                              1332
    Þer-offe with-i{n}ne þe firste yer
  [Sidenote: Thou shalt be king within the year.]
    Shalt þou ben king, of euere-il del.
    But do nou als y wile rathe,
    Nim in with þe to denema[r]k baþe,                          1336
    And do þou nouth onfrest þis fare,
    Lith and selthe felawes are.
    For shal ich neuere bliþe be
    Til i with eyen denemark se;                                1340
    For ich woth, þat al þe lond
    Shalt þou haue{n} in þin hon[d].
  [Sidenote: Pray Grim’s sons to go with you to Denmark.]
    Prey grimes sones alle þre,
    That he wenden forþ with þe;                                1344
    I wot, he wilen þe nouth werne,
    With þe wende shule{n} he yerne,
    For he loue{n} þe herte-like,
    Þou maght til he aren quike,                                1348
    Hwore so he o worde aren;
  [Sidenote: Go at once.]
    Þere ship þou do he{m} swithe yare{n},
  [Sidenote: Delays are dangerous.”]
    And loke þat þou dwelle{n} nouth:
    Dwelling haueth ofte scaþe wrouth.”                         1352


[Headnote: HAVELOK PRAYS FOR VENGEANCE ON GODARD.]

    +Hwan Hauelok herde þat she radde,
    Sone it was day, sone he him cladde,
  [Sidenote: [Fol. 211b, col. 1.]]
    And sone to þe kirke yede,
    Or he dide ani oþer dede,                                   1356
    And bifor þe rode biga{n} falle,
    Croiz and crist bi[gan] to kalle,
  [Sidenote: Havelok prays for success, and for vengeance
  on his foe, who had caused him to be a beggar.]
    And seyde, “louerd, þat al weldes,
    Wind and wat{er}, wodes and feldes,                         1360
    For the holi milce of you,
    Haue m{er}ci of me, louerd, nou!
    And wreke me yet on mi fo,
    Þat ich saw biforn min eyne slo                             1364
    Mine sistres, with a knif,
    And siþen wolde me mi lyf
    Haue reft, for in the [depe] se
    Bad he grim haue drenched me.                               1368
    He [hath] mi lond with mikel vn-Rith,
    With michel wro{n}g, with mikel plith,
    For i ne[64] misdede him neu{er}e nouth,
    And haued me to sorwe brouth.                               1372
    He haueth me do mi mete to þigge,
    And ofte in sorwe and pine ligge.
    Louerd, haue m{er}ci of me,
    And late [me] wel passe þe se,                              1376
  [Sidenote: He prays for a fair passage across the sea.]
    Þat ihc haue ther-offe douthe and kare,
    With-uten stormes ouer-fare,
    Þat y ne dre{n}ched [be] þer-ine,
    Ne forfaren for no sinne.                                   1380
    And bringge me wel to þe lond,
    Þat godard haldes in his hond;
    Þat is mi Rith, eueri del:
    Ih{es}u c{ri}st, þou wost it wel!”                          1384

      [Footnote 64: MS. ine.]


    +Þa{n}ne he hauede his bede seyd,
  [Sidenote: He leaves his offering on the altar.]
    His offrende on þe auter leyd,
    His leue at ih{es}u c{ri}st he tok,
    And at his suete moder ok,                                  1388
    And at þe croiz, þat he biforn lay,
    Siþe{n} yede sore grotinde awey.


[Headnote: HAVELOK ADDRESSES GRIM’S THREE SONS.]

  [Sidenote: He finds Grim’s sons ready to fish.]
    [65]+Hwa{n} he com hom, he wore yare,
    Grimes sones, forto fare                                    1392
    In-to þe se, fishes to gete,
    Þat hauelok mithe wel of ete.
    But auelok þouthe al anoþer,
  [Sidenote: Havelok calls Grim’s three sons.]
    First he ka[l]de þe heldeste broþer,                        1396
    Roberd þe rede, bi his name,

[Headnote: HE ASKS THEM TO GO WITH HIM TO DENMARK.]

    Wiliam wenduth, and h[uwe r]aue{n},[66]
    Grimes sones alle þre,
  [Sidenote: [Fol. 211b, col. 2.]]
    And sey[d]e, “liþes nou alle to me,                         1400
    Lou{er}dinges, ich wile you sheue,
    A þing of me þat ye wel knewe.
  [Sidenote: He says, “My father was king of Denmark.]
    Mi fader was king of denshe lond,
    Denemark was al in his hond                                 1404
    Þe day þat he was quik and ded;
    But þa{n}ne hauede he wicke red,
    Þat he me, and denemark al,
  [Sidenote: He left me and my sisters in charge of
  a foul fiend, who slew my sisters, and bade Grim drown me.]
    And mine sistres bi-tawte a þral:                           1408
    A deueles lime [he] hus bitawte,
    And al his lond, and al hise authe.
    For y saw that fule fend
    Mine sistres slo with hise hend;                            1412
    First he shar a-two here þrotes,
    And siþen [karf] hem al to grotes,
    And siþen bad [he] in þe se
    Grim, youre fader, dre{n}che{n} me.                         1416
    Deplike dede he him swere
    On bok, þat he sholde me bere
    Vnto þe se, an dre{n}chen ine,
    And [he][66*] wolde take{n} on him þe sinne.                1420
  [Sidenote: But Grim was wise.]
    But grim was wis, and swiþe hende,
    Wolde he nouth his soule shende;
    Leuere was him to be for-sworen,
    Þan dre{n}chen me, and ben for-lorn;                        1424
    But sone biga{n} he forto fle
  [Sidenote: He fled from Denmark with me, and took care of me.]
    Fro denemark, forto ber_w_en[67] me,
    For yif[68] ich hauede þer ben fu{n}den,
    Hauede ben slayn, or harde bunde{n},                        1428
    And heye ben henged on a tre,
    Hauede go for him gold ne fe.
    For-þi fro denemark hider he fledde,
    And me ful fayre and ful wel fedde,                         1432
    So þat vn-to þis [ilke] day,
    Haue ich ben fed and fostred ay.
    But nou ich am up to þat helde
    Cume{n}, that ich may wepne welde,                          1436
    And y may grete di{n}tes yeue,
  [Sidenote: And now, I must go to Denmark.]
    Shal i neuere hwil ich lyue
    Ben glad, til that ich denemark se;
  [Sidenote: Go with me, and I will make you rich men.”]
    I preie you þat ye wende with me,                           1440
    And ich may mak you riche men,
    Ilk of you shal haue castles ten,
    And þe lond þat þor-til longes,
    Borwes, tunes, wodes and wo{n}ges.”[69]                     1444

     *   *   *   *   *
     *   *   *   *   *

      [Footnote 65: In the MS. the Capital letter is prefixed to the
      next line.]

      [Footnote 66: MS. haue{n}. Cf. ll. 1868, 2528. Only an
      assonance, not a rime, seems intended.]

      [Footnote 66*: Word added by editor: see Emendations.]

      [Footnote 67: MS. berƿen, _the A.S. _w_ being used here._
      Cf. l. 697.]

      [Footnote 68: MS. yif.]

      [Footnote 69: A folio has here been cut out of the MS.,
      containing 180 lines. The missing portion must have been to
      this effect. “To this they gladly assented; and Havelok,
      accompanied by his wife Goldeborw and the sons of Grim, set
      sail for Denmark. Disembarking, they travel till they reach
      the castle of a great Danish earl, named Ubbe, who had
      formerly been a close friend to king Birkabeyn. Havelok begs
      that he will allow him to live in that part of the country,
      and to gain a livelihood by trading.”]

[Headnote: HAVELOK GIVES UBBE A GOLD RING.]

  [Sidenote: [Fol. 212, col. 1.]]
    “With swilk als ich byen shal:
    Þer-of bi-seche you nou leue;
  [Sidenote: Havelok asks Ubbe to give him leave to buy
  and sell there.]
    Wile ich speke with non oþer reue,
    But with þe, þat iustise are,                               1628
    Þat y mithe seke{n}[70] mi ware
    In gode borwes up and doun,
    And faren ich wile fro tun to tun.”
    A gold ring drow he forth anon,                             1632
    An hundred pu{n}d was worth þe ston,
  [Sidenote: He gives Ubbe a gold ring.]
    And yaf it ubbe for to spede:--
    He was ful wis þat first yaf mede,
    And so was hauelok ful wis here,                            1636
  [Sidenote: Dearly he sells it, all the same.]
    He solde his gold ring ful dere,
    Was neuere non so dere sold,
    For chapme{n}, neyþer yung ne old:
    Þat sholen[71] ye forthward ful wel here{n},                1640
    Yif þat ye wile þe storie heren.

      [Footnote 70: _Qu._ sellen.]

      [Footnote 71: MS. shoren.]


[Headnote: UBBE INVITES HAVELOK TO A FEAST.]

  [Sidenote: Ubbe takes the ring, admires Havelok’s make
  and strength, and thinks he ought to be a knight,
  not a pedlar.]
    +Hwa{n} ubbe hauede þe gold ring,
    Hauede he youenet for no þing,
    Nouth for þe borw euere-il del:--                           1644
    Hauelok bi-hel he swiþe wel,
    Hw he was wel of bones maked,
    Brod in þe sholdres, ful wel schaped,
    Þicke in þe brest, of bodi long;                            1648
    He semede wel to ben wel strong.
    “Deus!” hwat ubbe, “qui ne were he knith?
    I woth, þat he is swiþe with!
    Bet{er}e semede him to bere                                 1652
    Helm on heued, sheld and sp{er}e,
    Þa{n}ne to beye and selle ware.
    Allas! þat he shal þer-with fare.
    Goddot! wile he trowe me,                                   1656
    Chaffare shal he late be.”
    Neþeles he seyde sone:
  [Sidenote: “Havelok, bring your wife, and come
  and eat with me.”]
    “Hauelok, haue [þou] þi bone,
    And y ful wel rede þ[e]                                     1660
    Þat þou come, and ete with me
    To-day, þou, and þi fayre wif,
    Þat þou louest also þi lif.
    And haue þou of hire no drede,                              1664
    Shal hire no man shame bede.
    Bi þe fey that y owe to þe,
    Þerof shal i me serf-borw be.”


[Headnote: UBBE TAKES A GREAT FANCY TO HAVELOK.]

    +Hauelok herde þat he bad,                                  1668
    And thow was he ful sore drad,
  [Sidenote: [Fol. 212, col. 2.]]
    With him to ete, for hise wif;
  [Sidenote: Havelok fears ill may come of it.]
    For him wore leuere þat his lif
    Him wore reft, þan she i{n} blame                           1672
    Felle, or lauthe ani shame.
    Hwa{n}ne he hauede his wille _w_at,[72]
    Þe stede, þat he onne sat,
  [Sidenote: But Ubbe rides away, saying, “Mind that you come.”]
    Smot ubbe with spures faste,                                1676
    And forth awey, but at þe laste,
    Or he fro him ferde,
    Seyde he, þat his folk herde:
    “Loke þat ye come{n} beþe,                                  1680
    For ich it wile, and ich it rede.”

      [Footnote 72: MS. _either_ þat _or_ ƿat.]


[Headnote: UBBE SENDS HAVELOK TO BERNARD.]

  [Sidenote: Havelok dares not refuse.]
    +Hauelok ne durste, þe he were adrad,
    Nouth with-sitte{n} þat ubbe bad;
    His wif he dide with him lede,                              1684
    Vn-to þe heye curt he y[e]de.[73]
  [Sidenote: Robert the Red leads Goldborough.]
    Roberd hire ledde, þat was red,
    Þat hau[ed]e þarned[73*] for hire þe ded
    Or ani hauede hire misseyd,                                 1688
    Or hand with iuele onne leyd.
  [Sidenote: William Wendut is on the other side of her.]
    Willam wendut was þat oþer
    Þat hire ledde, roberdes broþer,
    Þat was with at alle nedes:                                 1692
    Wel is him þat god ma{n} fedes!
    Þan he were{n} come{n} to þe halle,
    Biforen ubbe, and hise me{n} alle,
  [Sidenote: Ubbe starts up to welcome them.]
    Vbbe stirte hem ageyn,                                      1696
    And mani a knith, and mani a sweyn,
    Hem for to se, and forto shewe;
    Þo stod hauelok als a lowe
  [Sidenote: Havelok is a head taller than any of them.]
    Aboven [þo] þat þer-i{n}ne wore,                            1700
    Rith al bi þe heued more
    Þa{n}ne ani þat þer-inne stod:
    Þo was ubbe bliþe of mod,
    Þat he saw him so fayr and he{n}de,                         1704
    Fro him ne mithe his herte we{n}de,
    Ne fro him, ne fro his wif;
    He louede hem sone so his lif.
  [Sidenote: Ubbe loves Havelok better than any one else.]
    Were{n} non i{n} denemark, þat him þouthe,                  1708
    Þat he so mikel loue mouthe;
    More he louede hauelok one,
    Þan al denemark, bi mine wone!
    Loke nou, hw god helpen kan                                 1712
    O mani wise wif and man.

      [Footnote 73: MS. yde.]

      [Footnote 73* (from Emendations):
      “_þarned_ is an error of the scribe for _þoled_; see the
      Glossary.”]


    +Hwan it was come{n} time to ete,
  [Sidenote: [Fol. 212b, col. 1.]]
    Hise wif dede ubbe sone in fete,
    And til hire seyde, al on game{n}:                          1716
  [Sidenote: Ubbe’s wife is to eat with Havelok,
  and Goldborough with Ubbe.]
    “Dame, þou and hauelok shule{n} ete same{n},
    And goldeboru shal ete wit me,
    Þat is so fayr so flour on tre;
    In al denemark nis[74, 74*] wimma{n}                        1720
    So fayr so sche, bi seint iohan!”
    Þa{n}ne [he] were set, and bord leyd,
    And þe beneysun was seyd,
  [Sidenote: There were cranes, swans, venison, fish, and wines.]
    Biforn he{m} com þe beste mete                              1724
    Þat king or cayser wolde ete;
    Kranes, swa{n}nes, ueneysun,
    Lax, lampreys, and god sturgun,
    Pyme{n}t to drinke, and god clare,                          1728
    Win hwit and red, ful god plente.
    Was þer-inne no page so lite,
    Þat euere wolde ale bite.
    Of þe mete forto tel,                                       1732
  [Sidenote: No need to tell it all.]
    Ne of þe metes[75] bidde[75*] i nout dwelle;
    Þat is þe storie for to lenge,
    It wolde anuye þis fayre genge.
  [Sidenote: When the feast is over, Ubbe thinks he must
  let them have an escort.]
    But hwan he haueden þe kiwing[76] de[y]led,[76*]            1736
    And fele siþes hauede{n} wosseyled,
    And with gode drinkes sete{n} longe,
    And it was time for to gonge,
    Il man to þer he cam fro,                                   1740
    Þouthe ubbe, “yf I late hem go,
    Þus one foure, with-uten mo,
    So mote ich brouke finger or to,
    For þis wi{m}ma{n} bes mike wo!                             1744
    For hire shal me{n} hire louerd slo.”
    He tok sone knithes ten,
    And wel sixti oþer men,
    Wit gode bowes, and with gleiues,                           1748
    And sende him unto þe greyues,
  [Sidenote: He sends them to Bernard Brown, and bids him
  take care of them till next day.]
    Þe beste ma{n} of al þe toun,
    Þat was named b{er}nard brun;
    And bad him, als he louede his lif,                         1752
    Hauelok wel y[e]men,[77] and his wif,
    And wel do wayten al þe nith,
    Til þe oþer day, þat it were lith.
    Bernard was trewe, and swiþe with,                          1756
    In al þe borw ne was no knith
    Þat betere couþe on stede riden,
    Helm on heued, ne swerd bi side.
  [Sidenote: [Fol. 212b, col. 2.]]
  [Sidenote: Bernard provides a rich supper for Havelok.]
    Hauelok he gladlike under-stod,                             1760
    With mike loue, and herte god,
    And dide greyþe a super riche,
    Also he was no with chinche,
    To his bihoue euer-il del,                                  1764
    Þat he mithe supe swiþe wel.

      [Footnote 74: MS. is.]

      [Footnote 74* (from Emendations):
      “Perhaps we should rather read--_is womman_ [_non_].”]

      [Footnote 75: _Qu._ win.]

      [Footnote 75* (from Emendations):
      “_Bidde_ must mean _offer_, rather than _bid_ (as in the
      Glossary); unless it be miswritten for _bide_ = tarry.”]

      [Footnote 76: Uncertain in MS. See note.]

      [Footnote 76*: Changed by editor from “deled”: see
      Emendations.]

      [Footnote 77: MS. ymen.]


[Headnote: A GANG OF THIEVES BESET BERNARD’S HOUSE.]

  [Sidenote: At suppertime sixty-one thieves come to the house,
  and bid Bernard open the door.]
    +Also he seten, and sholde soupe,
    So comes a ladde in a ioupe,
    And with him sixti oþer stronge,                            1768
    With swerdes drawen, and kniues lo{n}ge,
    Ilkan i{n} hande a ful god gleiue,
    And seyde, “undo, b{er}nard þe greyue!
    Vndo swiþe, and latus[78] in,                               1772

[Headnote: THREE OF THE THIEVES ATTACK HAVELOK.]

    Or þu art ded, bi seint austin!”
  [Sidenote: Bernard starts up, arms himself, and tells them
  to go away.]
    Bernard stirt up, þat was ful big,
    And caste a brinie up-on his rig,
    And grop an ax,[79] þat was ful god,                        1776
    Lep to þe dore, so he wore wod,
    And seyde, “hwat are ye, þat are þer-oute,
    Þat þus bigi{n}ne{n} forto stroute?
    Goth he{n}ne swiþe, fule þeues,                             1780
    For, bi þe louerd, þat ma{n} on leues,
    Shol ich casten þe dore open,
    Su{m}me of you shal ich drepen!
    And þe oþre shal ich kesten                                 1784
    In fet{er}es, and ful faste festen!”
  [Sidenote: They defy him.]
    “Hwat haue ye seid,” quoth a ladde,
    “Wenestu þat we ben adradde?
    We shole at þis dore gonge                                  1788
    Maugre þin, carl, or outh longe.”
  [Sidenote: They break the door open with a boulder.]
    He gripe{n} sone a bulder ston,
    And let it fleye, ful god won,
    Agen þe dore, þat it to-rof:                                1792
    Auelok it saw, and þider drof,
  [Sidenote: Havelok seizes the bar of the door, and says,
  “Come here to me.”]
    And þe barre sone vt-drow,
    Þat was unride, and gret ynow,
    And caste þe dore open wide,                                1796
    And seide, “her shal y now abide:
    Comes swiþe vn-to me![80]
    Datheyt hwo you he{n}ne fle!”
    “No,” quodh on, “þat shaltou coupe,”                        1800
    And bigan til him to loupe,
  [Sidenote: Three men attack Havelok.]
    In his hond is swerd ut-drawe,
    Hauelok he wende þore haue slawe;
    And with [him] comen oþer two,                              1804
  [Sidenote: [Fol. 213, col. 1.]]
    Þat him wolde of liue haue do.

[Headnote: HAVELOK SLAYS SEVEN OF THE THIEVES.]

    Hauelok lifte up þe dore-tre,
  [Sidenote: He kills them all.]
    And at a dint he slow he{m} þre;
    Was non of hem þat his h{er}nes                             1808
    Ne lay þer-ute ageyn þe sternes.
  [Sidenote: A fourth he knocks down with a blow on the head.]
    Þe ferþe þat he siþen mette,
    Wit þe barre so he him grette,
    Bifor þe heued, þat þe rith eye                             1812
    Vt of þe hole made he fleye,
    And siþe clapte him on þe crune,
    So þat he stan-ded fel þor dune.
  [Sidenote: A fifth he hits between the shoulders.]
    Þe fifte þat he ouer-tok,                                   1816
    Gaf he a ful sor dint[e] ok,
    Bitwen þe sholdres, þer he stod,
    Þat he spen his herte blod.
  [Sidenote: A sixth he smites on the neck.]
    Þe sixte wende for to fle,                                  1820
    And he clapte him with þe tre
    Rith in þe fule necke so,
    Þat he smot hise necke on to.
    Þa{n}ne þe sixe weren doun feld,                            1824
  [Sidenote: A seventh aims at Havelok’s eye.]
    Þe seuenþe brayd ut his swerd,
    And wolde hauelok Riht i{n} the eye;
    And haue{lok} le[t þe][81] barre fleye,
  [Sidenote: Havelok kills him.]
    And smot him sone ageyn þe brest,                           1828
    Þat hauede he neu{er}e sch[r]ifte of p{re}st;
    For he was ded on lesse hwile,
    Þan me{n} mouthe re{n}ne a mile.
  [Sidenote: The rest divide into two parties,
  and rush at him like dogs at a bear.]
    Alle þe oþere were{n} ful kene,                             1832
    A red þei taken hem bi-twene,
    þat he sholde him bi-halue,
    And brise{n} so, þat wit no salue
    Ne sholde him helen leche non:                              1836
    Þey drowen ut swerdes, ful god won,
    And shoten on him, so don on bere
    Dogges, þat wolden him to-tere,
    Þa{n}ne men doth þe bere beyte:                             1840
    Þe laddes were kaske and teyte,
    And vn-bi-yeden him ilkon,
    Su{m} smot with tre, and su{m} wit ston;
    Su{m}me putte{n} with gleyue, i{n} bac and side,            1844
  [Sidenote: They wound Havelok in twenty places.]
    And yeue{n} wundes longe and wide;
    In twenti stedes, and wel mo,
    Fro þe croune til the to.
    Hwan he saw þat, he was wod,                                1848
    And was it ferlik hw he stod,
  [Sidenote: [Fol. 213, col. 2.]]
    For the blod ran of his sides
    So water þat fro þe welle glides;
    But þa{n}ne bigan he for to mowe                            1852
    With the barre, and let hem shewe,
    Hw he cowþe sore smite,
  [Sidenote: He at last succeeds in killing twenty of them.]
    For was þer non, long ne lite,
    Þat he Mouthe ouer-take,                                    1856
    Þat he ne garte his croune krake;
    So þat on a litel stund,
    Felde he twenti to þe grund.

      [Footnote 78: _Sic_ in MS.]

      [Footnote 79: MS. ar; _but see_ l. 1894.]

      [Footnote 80: MS. vnto me datheit,--evidently the repetition
      of the first word in the succeeding line.]

      [Footnote 81: _Qu._ Hauelok let the. MS. “haue le.”]


[Headnote: THE THIEVES SHOOT AT HIM FROM A DISTANCE.]

  [Sidenote: They throw stones at him.]
    +Þo bigan gret dine to rise,                                1860
    For þe laddes on ilke wise
    Him asaylede{n} wit grete dintes,
    Fro fer he stoden, him with flintes
    And gleyues schote{n} him fro ferne,                        1864
    For drepen him he wolden yerne;
    But durste{n} he newhe{n} him no more,
    Þa{n}ne he bor or leu{n} wore.


[Headnote: HUGH AND THE REST COME TO THE RESCUE.]

  [Sidenote: Hugh Raven hears the noise, and comes to help.]
    +Huwe raue{n} þat dine herde,                               1868
    And þowthe wel, þat me{n} mis-ferde
    With his louerd, for his wif,
    And grop an ore, and a long knif,
    And þider drof al so an hert,                               1872
    And cham þer on a litel stert,
    And saw how þe laddes wode
    Hauelok his louerd umbistode,
    And bete{n} on him so doth þe smith                         1876
    With þe hamer on þe stith.


    +“Allas!” hwat hwe, “þat y was bore{n}!
    Þat eu{er}e et ich bred of koren!
    Þat ich here þis sorwe se!                                  1880
  [Sidenote: Hugh calls out to Robert and William.]
    Roberd! willam! hware ar ye?
    Gripeth eþer unker a god tre,
    And late we nouth þise doges fle,
    Til ure louerd wreke [we];                                  1884
    Cometh swiþe, and folwes me!
    Ich haue in honde a ful god ore:
    Datheit wo ne smite sore!”
  [Sidenote: Robert comes to the rescue, and William too,
  and Bernard.]
    “Ya! leue, ya!” quod roberd sone,                           1888
    “We haue{n} ful god lith of þe mone.”
    Roberd grop a staf, strong and gret,
    Þat mouthe ful wel bere a net,
    And willam wendut grop a tre                                1892
    Mikel grettere þan his þe,[82]
    And b{er}nard held his ax ful faste;
  [Sidenote: [Fol. 213b, col. 1.]]
    I seye, was he nouth þe laste;
    And lopen forth so he weren wode                            1896
    To þe laddes, þer he stode,
    And yaf hem wundes swiþe grete;
  [Sidenote: They fight with the thieves.]
    Þer mithe men wel se boyes bete,
    And ribbes in here sides breke,                             1900
    And hauelok on hem wel wreke.
    He broken armes, he broken knes,
    He broken shankes, he broke{n} thes.
    He dide þe blode þere re{n}ne dune                          1904
    To þe fet rith fro the crune,
  [Sidenote: No head was spared.]
    For was þer spared heued non:
    He leyden on heuedes, ful god won,
    And made croune[s] breke and crake,                         1908
    Of þe broune, and of þe blake;
  [Sidenote: He made their backs as soft as their bellies.]
    He made{n} here backes al so bloute
    Als h[{er}]e[83] wombes, and made he{m} rowte
    Als he weren kradelbarnes:                                  1912
    So dos þe child þat moder þarnes.

      [Footnote 82: MS. þre, _the _r_ being caught from the word
      above._ Cf. l. 1903.]

      [Footnote 83: _Qu._ here. MS. he.]


[Headnote: ALL THE SIXTY THIEVES ARE SLAIN.]

    +Daþeit _w_o[84] recke! for he it s{er}uede,
    Hwat dide he þore were{n} he werewed;
    So longe hauede{n} he but and bet                           1916
    With neues under hernes set,
  [Sidenote: All sixty assailants are slain.]
    Þat of þo sixti men and on
    Ne wente þer awey liues non.

      [Footnote 84: MS. “ƿe,” clearly miswritten for “ƿo” or “wo.”
      See ll. 2047, 296, 300, &c.]


[Headnote: UBBE ASKS BERNARD WHAT HAS HAPPENED.]

  [Sidenote: At morn, there they lay like dogs.]
    +ON þe morwe{n}, h_w_an[85] it was day,                     1920
    Ilc on other wirwed lay,
    Als it were dogges þat were{n} he{n}ged,
    And su{m}me leye i{n} dikes slenget,
    And su{m}me in gripes bi þe her                             1924
    Drawen ware, and lat{en} ther.
    Sket cam tiding intil ubbe,
    Þat hauelok hauede with a clubbe
    Of hise slawen sixti and on                                 1928
    Sergaunz, þe beste þat mithe{n} gon.
  [Sidenote: Ubbe comes to see what is the matter.]
    “Deus!” quoth ubbe, “hwat may þis be!
    Bet{er}e his i nime[86] miself and se,
    Þat þis baret on hwat is wold,                              1932
    Þa{n}ne i sende yunge or old.
    For yif i sende him un-to,
    I wene me{n} sholde him shame do,
    And þat ne wolde ich for no þing:                           1936
    I loue him wel, bi heuene king!
    Me wore leuere i wore lame,
    Þa{n}ne men dide him ani shame,
  [Sidenote: [Fol. 213b, col. 2.]]
    Or tok, or onne handes leyde,                               1940
    Vn-ornelike,[87] or same seyde.”
    He lep up on a stede lith,
    And with him mani a noble knith,
    And ferde forth un-to þe tun,                               1944
  [Sidenote: He calls for Bernard Brown.]
    And dide calle b{er}nard brun
    Vt of his hus, wan he þer cam;
    And b{er}nard sone ageyn [him] nam,
    Al to-tused and al to-torn,                                 1948
    Ner also naked so he was born,
    And al to-brised, bac and þe:
  [Sidenote: Ubbe asks who has beaten him about so?]
    Quoth ubbe, “b{er}nard, hwat is þe?
    Hwo haues þe þus ille maked,                                1952
    Þus to-riue{n}, and al mad naked?”

      [Footnote 85: MS. “hhan,” miswritten for “hƿan,” from which it
      differs very slightly.]

      [Footnote 86: MS. inime.]

      [Footnote 87: MS. Vn ornelſke; _but _ſ_ should certainly be
      _i_._]


[Headnote: BERNARD RELATES HAVELOK’S PROWESS.]

  [Sidenote: “Sixty thieves attacked me last night.]
    +“Louerd,[88] m{er}ci,” quot he sone,
    “To-nicht also ros þe mone
    Come{n} her mo þan sixti þeues,                             1956
    With lokene copes, and wide sleues,
    Me forto robben, and to pine,
    And for to drepe me and mine.
    Mi dore he broken up ful sket,                              1960
    And wolde me binden hond and fet.
    Wan þe godeme{n} þat sawe,
  [Sidenote: Havelok and his friends drove them off.]
    Hauelok, and he þat bi þe wowe
    Leye, he stirte{n} up sone on-on,                           1964
    And su{m}me grop tre, and su{m} grop ston,
    And driue he{m} ut, þei he were{n} crus,
    So dogges ut of milne-hous.
    Hauelok grop þe dore-tre,                                   1968
    And [at] a dint he slow he{m} thre.
    He is þe beste ma{n} at nede,
    Þat eu{er}e mar shal ride stede!
    Als helpe god, bi mine wone,                                1972
  [Sidenote: He is worth a thousand men.]
    A þhousend of me{n} his he worth one!
    Yif he ne were, ich were nou ded,
    So haue ich don Mi soule red;
    But it is hof him mikel sinne;                              1976
    He made{n} him swilke woundes þri{n}ne,
    Þat of þe alþer-leste wounde
    Were a stede brouht to grunde.
  [Sidenote: He has some bad wounds, more than twenty.]
    He haues a wunde i{n} the side,                             1980
    With a gleyue, ful un-ride,
    And he haues on þoru his arum,
    Þer-of is ful mikel haru{m},
  [Sidenote: [Fol. 214, col. 1.]]
    And he haues on þoru his þhe,                               1984
    Þe vn-rideste þat men may se,
    And oþe[r] wundes haues he stro{n}ge,
    Mo than twenti swiþe longe.
    But siþen he hauede lauth þe sor                            1988
    Of þe wundes, was neuere bor
    Þat so fauth so he fauth þa{n}ne;
    Was non þat hauede þe hern-panne
    So hard, þat he ne dede alto-cruhsse,                       1992
    And alto-shiuere, and alto-frusshe.
  [Sidenote: He followed them like a dog does a hare.]
    He folwede he{m} so hund dos hare,
    Daþeyt on he wolde spare,
    Þat [he] ne made he{m} euerilk on                           1996
    Ligge stille so doth þe ston:
    And þer nis he nouth to frie,
    For oþer sholde he make hem lye
    Ded, or þei him hauede slawen,                              2000
    Or alto-hewen, or al-to-drawen.

      [Footnote 88: MS. Iouerd.]


    +Louerd, haui no more plith
    Of þat ich was þus greþed to-nith.
    Þus wolde þe theues me haue reft,                           2004
    But god-þank, he hauenet sure keft.
  [Sidenote: But I fear Havelok is all but dead.”]
    But it is of him mikel scaþe:
    I woth þat he bes ded ful raþe.”


[Headnote: THE OTHERS CONFIRM BERNARD’S STORY.]

    +Quoth ubbe, “b{er}nard, seyst þou soth?”                   2008
    “Ya, sire, that i ne[89] lepe oth.
    Yif y, louerd, a word leye,
    To-morwen do me hengen heye.”
  [Sidenote: The rest confirm Bernard’s story.]
    Þe burgeys þat þer-bi stode þore,                           2012
    Grundlike and grete oþes swore,
    Litle and mikle, yunge and holde,
    Þat was soth, þat b{er}nard tolde.
    Soth was, þat he wolde{n} him bynde,                        2016
    And trusse al þat he mithen fynde
    Of hise, in arke or in kiste,
    Þat he mouthe i{n} seckes þriste.
  [Sidenote: “The thieves wanted to steal all he had.]
    “Louerd, he hauede{n} al awey born                          2020
    His þing, and him-self alto-torn,
    But als god self barw him wel,
    Þat he ne tinte no catel.
    Hwo mithe so mani sto{n}de ageyn,                           2024
    Bi nither-tale, knith or swein?
    He were{n} bi tale sixti and ten,
    Starke laddes, stalworþi men,
  [Sidenote: They were led on by one G[r]iffin Gall.”]
    And on, þe mayster of he{m} alle,                           2028
    Þat was þe name giffin[90] galle.
  [Sidenote: [Fol. 214, col. 2.]]
    Hwo mouthe agey[{n}][91] so mani sto{n}de,
    But als þis ma{n} of f{er}ne londe
    Haueth he{m} slawe{n} with a tre?                           2032
    Mikel ioie haue he!
    God yeue him mikel god to welde,
    Boþe in tun, and ek in felde!
    We[l][92] is set he etes mete.”                             2036
  [Sidenote: Ubbe sends for Havelok, to dub him knight.]
    Quoth ubbe, “doth him swiþe fete,
    Þat y mouthe his woundes se,
    Yf that he mouthe{n} heled[93] be.
    For yf he mouthe couere yet,                                2040
    And gange{n} wel up-on hise fet,
    Mi-self shal dubbe him to knith,
    For-þi þat he is so with.
    And yif he liuede, þo foule theues,                         2044
    Þat were{n} of kaym kin and eues,
    He sholden hange bi þe necke;
    Of here ded daþeit wo recke,
    Hwan he yeden þus on nithes                                 2048
    To binde boþe burgme{n} and knithes.
    For bynderes loue ich neuere mo,
    Of hem ne yeue ich nouht a slo.”

      [Footnote 89: MS. ine.]

      [Footnote 90: _Qu._ griffin.]

      [Footnote 91: MS. agey.]

      [Footnote 92: Cf. ll. 772, 907.]

      [Footnote 93: MS. holed. See l. 2058.]


[Headnote: UBBE SENDS FOR HAVELOK AND TAKES HIM TO HIS CASTLE.]

  [Sidenote: Havelok is brought before Ubbe.]
    +Hauelok was bifore ubbe browth,                            2052
    Þat hauede for him ful mikel þouth,
    And mikel sorwe in his herte
    For hise wundes, þat we[r] so smerte.


    +But hwa{n} his wundes were{n} shewed,                      2056
  [Sidenote: A leech says he can be healed.]
    And a leche hauede knawed,
    Þat he hem mouthe ful wel hele,
    Wel make him gange, and ful wel mele,
    And wel a palefrey bistride,                                2060
    And wel up-on a stede ride,
    Þo let ubbe al his care
    And al his sorwe ouer-fare;
  [Sidenote: Ubbe invites him and Goldborough to his own castle.]
    And seyde, “cu{m} now forth with me,                        2064
    And goldeboru, þi wif, with þe,
    And þine seriaunz al þre,
    For nou wile y youre warant be;
    Wile y non of here frend                                    2068
    Þat þu slowe with þin hend
    Moucte wayte þe [to] slo,
    Also þou gange to and fro.
    I shal lene þe a bowr,                                      2072
    Þat is up in þe heye tour,
    Til þou mowe ful wel go,
  [Sidenote: [Fol. 214b, col. 1.]]
    And wel ben hol of al þi wo.
    It ne shal no þing be{n} bitwene                            2076
    Þi bour and min, also y wene,
    But a fayr firrene wowe;--
    Speke y loude, or spek y lowe,
    Þou shalt[94] ful wel heren me,                             2080
    And þan þu wilt, þou shalt me se.
  [Sidenote: He promises to protect Goldborough.]
    A rof shal hile us boþe o-nith,
    Þat none of mine, clerk ne knith,
    Ne sholen þi wif no shame bede,                             2084
    No more þan min, so god me rede!”

      [Footnote 94: MS. sahalt; _and the second a is expuncted by
      mistake, instead of the first_.]


[Headnote: UBBE SEES THE MIRACULOUS LIGHT / WHICH ISSUES FROM HAVELOK’S
MOUTH.]

    +HE dide un-to þe borw bringe
    Sone anon, al with ioynge,
    His wif, and his serganz þre,                               2088
    Þe beste men þat mouthe be.
  [Sidenote: The first night, about midnight, Ubbe wakes
  and sees a great light.]
    Þe firste nith he lay þer-inne,
    Hise wif, and his serganz þrinne,
    Aboute þe middel of þe nith                                 2092
    Wok ubbe, and saw a mikel lith
    In þe bour þat hauelok lay,
    Also brith so it were day.


  [Sidenote: Ubbe says he must go and see what it means.]
    +“Deus!” quoth ubbe, “hwat may þis be?                      2096
    Bet{er}e is i go miself, and se:
    Hweþer he sitte{n} nou, and wesseyle{n},
    Or of ani shotshipe to-deyle,
    Þis tid nithes, also foles;                                 2100
    Þan birþe men caste{n} hem i{n} poles,
    Or in a grip, or in þe fen:
    Nou ne sitten none but wicke men,
    Glotuns, reu[e]res, or wicke þeues,                         2104
    Bi c{ri}st, þat alle folk onne leues!”


  [Sidenote: He peeps in, and sees them all asleep.]
    +He stod, and totede i{n} at a bord,
    Her he spak anilepi word,
    And saw hem slepen faste ilkon,                             2108
    And lye stille so þe ston;
    And saw al þat mikel lith
    Fro hauelok cam, þat was so brith.
  [Sidenote: The light issues from Havelok’s mouth.]
    Of his mouth it com il del,                                 2112
    Þat was he war ful swiþe wel.
    “Deus!” quoth he, “hwat may þis mene!”
    He calde boþe arwe me{n} and kene,
    Knithes, and serganz swiþe sleie,                           2116
    Mo þan an hundred, with-ute{n} leye,
    And bad hem alle come{n} and se,
    Hwat þat selcuth mithe be.


[Headnote: THE LIGHT SHOWS THAT HAVELOK IS THE HEIR.]

  [Sidenote: [Fol. 214b, col. 2.]]
    +Als þe knithes were come{n} alle,                          2120
    Þer hauelok lay, ut of þe halle,
    So stod ut of his mouth a glem,
    Rith al swilk so þe sunne-bem;
  [Sidenote: The light is like that of 107 candles.]
    Þat al so lith wa[s] þare, bi heuene!                       2124
    So þer brenden serges seuene,
    And an hundred serges ok:
    Þat durste hi sweren on a bok.
    He slepen faste alle fiue,                                  2128
    So he weren brouth of liue;
  [Sidenote: Havelok and Goldborough are fast asleep.]
    And hauelok lay on his lift side,
    In his armes his brithe bride.
    Bi þe pappes he leyen naked:                                2132
    So faire two weren neuere maked
    In a bed to lyen samen:--
    Þe knithes þouth of hem god game{n},
    Hem forto shewe, and loken to.                              2136
    Rith also he stode{n} alle so,
    And his bac was toward he{m} we{n}d,
  [Sidenote: They see a bright cross on his back,
  denoting kingship.]
    So were{n} he war of a croiz ful gent,
    On his rith shuldre sw[iþ]e[95] brith,                      2140
    Brithter þan gold ageyn þe lith.
    So þat he wiste heye and lowe,
    Þat it was kunrik þat he sawe.
    It sparkede, and ful brith shon,                            2144
    So doth þe gode charbucle ston,
  [Sidenote: It was light enough to choose a penny by.]
    Þat men Mouthe se by þe lith,
    A peni chesen, so was it brith.
    Þa{n}ne bihelden he him faste,                              2148
    So þat he knewe{n} at þe laste,
  [Sidenote: They know he is Birkabeyn’s son and heir.]
    Þat he was birkabeynes sone,
    Þat was here king, þat was he{m} wone
    Wel to yeme, and wel were                                   2152
    Ageynes uten-laddes here.
    “For it was neuere yet a broþer
    In al denemark so lich anoþer,
    So þis man þat is so fayr                                   2156
    Als birkabeyn, he is hise eyr.”

      [Footnote 95: MS. swe, _for_ swiþe. Cf. l. 1252.]


    +He fellen sone at hise fet,
  [Sidenote: They weep for joy.]
    Was non of hem þat he ne gret,
    Of ioie he weren alle so fawen,                             2160
    So he him haueden of erþe drawe{n}.
    Hise fet he kisten an hundred syþes,
    Þe tos, þe nayles, and þe lithes,
    So þat he bigan to wakne,[96]                               2164
  [Sidenote: [Fol. 215, col. 1.]]
    And wit he{m} ful sore to blakne,
    For he wende he wolde{n} him slo,
  [Sidenote: Havelok wakes.]
    Or elles binde him, and do wo.

      [Footnote 96: Here follows the catchword-- “And wit hem.”]


[Headnote: UBBE SAYS HAVELOK SHALL BE KING.]

  [Sidenote: Ubbe offers homage to him, and says he shall be
  king of Denmark.]
    +Quoth ubbe, “louerd, ne dred þe nowth,                     2168
    Me þinkes that I se þi þouth.
    Dere sone, wel is me,
    Þat y þe with eyn[e][97] se.
    Man-red, louerd, bede y þe,                                 2172
    Þi man auht i ful wel to be,
    For þu art come{n} of birkabeyn,
    Þat hauede mani knith and sweyn;
    And so shalt þou, louerd, haue,                             2176
    Þou þu be yet a ful yung knaue.
    Þou shalt be king of al denemark,
    Was þer-inne neu{er}e non so stark.
    To-morwen shaltu manrede take                               2180
    Of þe brune and of þe blake;
    Of alle þat aren in þis tun,
    Boþe of erl, and of barun,
    And of dreng, and of thayn,                                 2184
    And of knith, and of sweyn.
    And so shaltu ben mad knith
    Wit blisse, for þou art so with.”

      [Footnote 97: We find _eyne_ in ll. 680, 1273, &c.]


  [Sidenote: Havelok is blithe, and thanks God.]
    +Þo was hauelok swiþe bliþe,                                2188
    And þankede God ful fele siþe.
    On þe morwen, wan it was lith,
    And gon was þist{er}nesse of þe nith,
    Vbbe dide up-on a stede                                     2192
    A ladde lepe, and þider bede
  [Sidenote: Ubbe summons all his lords.]
    Erles, barouns, drenges, theynes,
    Klerkes, knithes, bu[r]geys,[98] sweynes,
    Þat he sholden comen a-non,                                 2196
    Biforen him sone euerilkon,
    Also he loue{n} here liues,
    And here children, and here wiues.

      [Footnote 98: MS. bugeyſ.]


[Headnote: UBBE RELATES HAVELOK’S HISTORY.]

  [Sidenote: All come to receive his orders.]
    +Hise bode ne durste he non at-sitte,                       2200
    Þat he ne neme[99] for to wite
    Sone, hwat wolde þe iustise:
    And [he] bigan anon to rise,
    And seyde sone, “liþes me,                                  2204
    Alle samen, þeu and fre.
    A þing ich wile you here shauwe,
    Þat ye[100] alle ful wel knawe.
  [Sidenote: Ubbe tells them about Birkabeyn, who commended
  his children to Godard;]
    Ye wite{n} wel, þat al þis lond                             2208
    Was i{n} birkabeynes hond,
  [Sidenote: [Fol. 215, col. 2.]]
    Þe day þat he was quic and ded;
    And how þat he, bi youre red,
    Bitauhte hise children þre                                  2212
    Godard to yeme, and al his fe.
    Hauelok his sone he him tauhte,
    And hise two douhtres, and al his auhte,
    Alle herden ye him swere                                    2216
    On bok, and on messe-gere,
    Þat he shulde yeme hem wel,
    With-uten lac, with-uten tel.

      [Footnote 99: MS. meme; _miswritten for_ neme; _see_ ll. 1207,
      1931.]

      [Footnote 100: MS. he.]


  [Sidenote: and how Godard slew the two girls, but had pity
  on the boy; but afterwards ordered Grim to drown him.]
    +He let his oth al ouer-go,                                 2220
    Euere wurþe him yuel and wo!
    For[101] þe maydnes here lif
    Refte he boþen, with a knif,
    And him shulde ok haue slawe{n},                            2224
    Þe knif was at his herte drawe{n},
    But god him wolde wel haue saue,
    He hauede reunesse of þe knaue,
    So þat he with his hend                                     2228
    Ne drop him nouth, þat sor[i] fend,
    But sone dide he a fishere
    Swiþe grete oþes swere,
    Þat he sholde drenchen him                                  2232
    In þe se, þat was ful brim.

      [Footnote 101: _Qu._ Fro.]


  [Sidenote: But Grim fled with him to England.]
    +Hwan grim saw þat he was so fayr,
    And wiste he was þe Rith eir,
    Fro denemark ful sone he fledde                             2236
    In-til englond, and þer him fedde
    Mani winter, þat til þis day
    Haues he ben fed and fostred ay.
  [Sidenote: Then Ubbe shows Havelok to them all,
  and bids them swear fealty to him.]
    Lokes, hware he sto{n}des her:                              2240
    In al þis werd ne haues he per;
    Non so fayr, ne non so long,
    Ne non so mikel, ne non so stro{n}g.
    In þis middelerd nis no knith                               2244
    Half so strong, ne half so with.
    Bes of him ful glad and bliþe,
    And cometh alle hider swiþe,
    Manrede youre louerd forto make,                            2248
    Boþe brune and þe blake.
    I shal mi-self do first þe gamen,
    And ye siþen alle samen.”


[Headnote: UBBE DOES HOMAGE TO HAVELOK.]

  [Sidenote: Ubbe swears fealty first.]
    +Oknes ful fayre he him sette,                              2252
    Mouthe noþing him þer-fro lette,
    And bi-cam is man Rith þare,
    Þat alle sawe{n} þat þere ware.
  [Sidenote: [Fol. 215b, col. 1.]]


  [Sidenote: All the rest do the same.]
    +After him stirt up laddes ten,                             2256
    And bi-come{n} hise men;[102]
    And siþen euerilk a baroun,
    Þat euere weren i{n} al that toun;
    And siþen drenges, and siþe{n} thaynes,                     2260
    And siþen knithes, and siþe{n} sweynes;
    So þat, or þat day was gon,
    In al þe tun ne was nouth on
    Þat it ne was his man bicomen:                              2264
    Manrede of alle hauede he nomen.

      [Footnote 102: A word is added in the MS. after _men_,
      apparently _beye_. Perhaps we should read: _hise heye men_.]


[Headnote: ALL SWEAR TO BE FAITHFUL TO HAVELOK.]

  [Sidenote: Havelok makes them swear to be faithful
  to him always.]
    +Hwan he hauede of he{m} alle
    Manrede taken, i{n} the halle,
    Grundlike dide he hem swere,                                2268
    Þat he sholden him god feyth bere
    Ageynes alle þat woren on liue;
    Þer-yen ne wolde neuer on striue,
    Þat he ne made{n} sone þat oth,                             2272
    Riche and poure, lef and loth.
    Hwan þat was maked, sone he se{n}de,
  [Sidenote: Ubbe sends for all the sheriffs and constables.]
    Vbbe, writes fer and hende,
    After alle þat castel yemede,                               2276
    Burwes, tunes, sibbe an fremde,
    Þat þider sholde{n} come{n} swiþe
    Til him, and heren tiþandes bliþe,
    Þat he hem alle shulde telle:                               2280
    Of hem ne wolde neu{er}e on dwelle,
    Þat he ne come sone plattinde,
    Hwo hors ne hauede, com ga{n}ga{n}de.
    So þat with-i{n}ne a fourtenith,                            2284
    In al denemark ne was no knith,
    Ne conestable, ne shireue,
    Þat com of adam and of eue,
  [Sidenote: They all come.]
    Þat he ne com biforn sire ubbe:                             2288
    He dredde{n} him so þhes[103] doth clubbe.

      [Footnote 103: _Qu._ þes, _i.e._ thighs; or the spelling
      _þhes_ may be intentional; see l. 1984. But Sir F. Madden
      suggests _þeues_.]


  [Sidenote: Ubbe shows Havelok to them all.]
    +Hwan he hauede{n} alle þe ki{n}g gret,
    And he weren alle dun set,
    Þo seyde ubbe, “lokes here,                                 2292
    Vre louerd swiþe dere,
    Þat shal ben king of al þe lond,
    And haue us alle under hond.
    For he is birkabeynes sone,                                 2296
    Þe king þat was vmbe stonde wone
    For to yeme, and wel were,
    Wit sharp[e][104] swerd, and lo{n}ge spere.
  [Sidenote: [Fol. 215b, col. 2.]]
    Lokes nou, hw he is fayr;                                   2300
    Sikerlike he is hise eyr.
    Falles alle to hise fet,
    Bicomes hise men ful sket.”
  [Sidenote: All swear to obey Havelok.]
    He weren for ubbe swiþe adrad,                              2304
    And dide sone al þat he bad,
    And yet dede{n} he sumdel more,
    O bok ful grundlike he swore,
    Þat he sholde with him halde                                2308
    Boþe ageynes stille and bolde,
    Þat euere wo[l]de his bodi dere:
    Þat dide [he] hem o boke swere.

      [Footnote 104: See l. 2645 for the final _e_.]


[Headnote: UBBE DUBS HAVELOK A KNIGHT.]

  [Sidenote: Ubbe dubs Havelok a knight, and makes him king.]
    +Hwan he hauede ma{n}rede and oth                           2312
    Taken of lef and of loth,
    Vbbe dubbede him to knith,
    With a swerd ful swiþe brith,
    And þe folk of al þe lond                                   2316
    Bitauhte him al in his hond,
    Þe cunnriche eu{er}il del,
    And made him king heylike and wel.
    Hwan he was king, þer mouthe me{n} se                       2320
    Þe moste ioie þat mouhte be:
  [Sidenote: Great joy and many sports.]
    Buttinge with sharpe sp{er}es,
    Skirming with taleuaces, þat me{n} beres,
    Wrastling with laddes, putti{n}g of ston,                   2324
    Harping and piping, ful god won,
    Leyk of mine, of hasard ok,
    Romanz reding on þe bok;
    Þer mouthe men here þe gestes singe,                        2328
    Þe gleymen on þe tabour dinge;
  [Sidenote: There is baiting of bulls and boars,
  and plenty of meat and wine.]
    Þer mouhte men se þe boles beyte,
    And þe bores, with hundes teyte;
    Þo mouthe men se eueril gleu,                               2332
    Þer mouthe me{n} se hw grim greu;
    Was neu{er}e yete ioie more
    In al þis werd, þan þo was þore.
    Þer was so mike[105] yeft of cloþes,                        2336
    Þat þou i swore you grete othes,
    I ne wore nouth þer-offe croud:
    Þat may i ful wel swere, bi god!
    Þere was swiþe gode metes,                                  2340
    And of wyn, þat men fer fetes,
    Rith al so mik and gret plente,
    So it were water of þe se.
    Þe feste fourti dawes sat,                                  2344
  [Sidenote: [Fol. 216, col. 1.]]
    So riche was neu{er}e non so þat.
  [Sidenote: The king makes Robert, William, and Hugh all barons.]
    Þe king made Roberd þere knith,
    Þat was ful strong, and ful with,
    And willa{m}, wendut het, his broþer,                       2348
    And huwe raue{n}, þat was þat oþer,
    And made hem barouns alle þre,
    And yaf hem lond, and oþer fe,
    So mikel, þat ilker twent[i] knihtes                        2352
    Hauede of genge, dayes and nithes.

      [Footnote 105: See l. 2342.]


[Headnote: HAVELOK IS MADE KING OF DENMARK.]

    +Hwan þat feste was al don,
  [Sidenote: A thousand knights accompany the king.]
    A thusand knihtes ful wel o bon
    With-held þe king, with hi{m} to lede;                      2356
    Þat ilkan hauede ful god stede,
    Helm, and sheld, and brinie brith,
    And al þe wepne þat fel to knith.
  [Sidenote: and five thousand sergeants.]
    With he{m} fiue thusand gode                                2360
    Sergaunz, þat were{n} to fyht wode,
    With-held he al of his genge:
    Wile I na more þe storie lenge.
    Yet hwan he hauede of al þe lond                            2364
    Þe casteles alle i{n} his hond,
    And conestables don þer-inne,
  [Sidenote: He swears to be avenged of Godard,
  and to find and bind him.]
    He swor, he ne sholde neuer bli{n}ne,
    Til þat he were of godard wreke{n},                         2368
    Þat ich haue of ofte speken.
    Hal hundred knithes dede he calle,
    And hise fif thusand sergaunz alle,
    And dide swere{n} on the bok                                2372
    Sone, and on þe auter ok,
    Þat he ne sholde neuere blinne,
    Ne for loue, ne for sinne,
    Til þat he haueden godard funde,                            2376
    And brouth biforn hi{m} faste bunde.


[Headnote: HAVELOK GOES TO SEEK OUT GODARD.]

    +Þanne he hauede{n} swor þis oth,
    Ne leten he nouth for lef ne loth,
    Þat he ne foren swiþe rathe,                                2380
  [Sidenote: He goes to meet Godard.]
    Þer he was unto þe paþe,
    Þer he yet on hunti{n}g for,
    With mikel genge, and swiþe stor.
    Robert, þat was of al þe ferd                               2384
    Mayster, was girt wit a swerd,
    And sat up-on a ful god stede,
    Þat vnder him Rith wolde wede;
  [Sidenote: Robert accosts Godard, and tells him to come
  to the king, who will repay him.]
    He was þe firste þat with godard                            2388
    Spak, and seyde, “hede[106] cauenard!
  [Sidenote: [Fol. 216, col. 2.]]
    Wat dos þu here at þis paþe?
    Cu{m} to þe king, swiþe and raþe.
    Þat sendes he þe word, and bedes,                           2392
    Þat þu þenke hwat þu him dedes,
    Hwan þu reftes with a knif
    Hise sistres here lif,
    An siþen bede þu in þe se                                   2396
    Drenchen him, þat herde he.
    He is to þe swiþe grim:
    Cu{m} nu swiþe un-to him,
    Þat king is of þis kuneriche.                               2400
    Þu fule man! þu wicke swike!
    And he shal yelde þe þi mede,
    Bi c{ri}st þat wolde on rode blede!”

      [Footnote 106: _Qu._ helde, _i.e._ old. Unless it means “heed!”]


    +Hwan godard herde þat þer þrette,                          2404
  [Sidenote: Godard and Robert strike each other.]
    With þe neue he robert sette
    Biforn þe teth a dint ful strong.
    And robert kipt ut a knif long,
    And smot him þoru þe rith arum:                             2408
    Þer-of was ful litel harum.


[Headnote: GODARD’S MEN ARE BEATEN.]

    +Hwan his folk þat sau and herde,
    Hwou robert with here louerd ferde,
    He haueden him wel ner browt of liue,                       2412
    Ne were{n} his two breþren and oþre fiue
    Slowen of here laddes ten,
    Of godardes alþer-beste men.
  [Sidenote: Godard’s men flee, but Godard rallies them.]
    Hwan þe oþre sawe{n} þat, he fledde{n},                     2416
    And godard swiþe loude gredde:
    “Mine knithes, hwat do ye?
    Sule ye þus-gate fro me fle?
    Ich haue you fed, and yet shal fede,                        2420
    Helpe me nu in þis nede,
    And late ye nouth mi bodi spille,
    Ne hauelok don of me hise wille.
    Yif ye id[107] do, ye do you shame,                         2424
    And bringeth you-self in mikel blame.”
    Hwan he þat herden, he wenten ageyn,
    And slowen a knit and[108] a sweyn
    Of þe kinges oune men,                                      2428
    And woundede{n} abute{n} ten.

      [Footnote 107: _Qu._ it.]

      [Footnote 108: MS. and and.]


[Headnote: GODARD IS BOUND AND LED TO HAVELOK.]

  [Sidenote: The king’s men kill all Godard’s men.]
    +The kinges men hwan he þat sawe,
    Scute{n} on hem, heye and lowe,
    And euerilk fot of hem slowe,                               2432
    But godard one, þat he flowe,
    So þe þef men dos henge,
  [Sidenote: [Fol. 216b, col. 1.]]
    Or hund men shole i{n} dike slenge.
    He bunde{n} him ful swiþe faste,                            2436
    Hwil þe bondes wolden laste,
    Þat he rorede als a bole,
    Þat he wore parred in an hole,
    With dogges forto bite and beite:                           2440
    Were þe bondes nouth to leite.
  [Sidenote: They bind Godard, and cast him on an old mare,
  to take him to Havelok.]
    He bounde{n} hi{m} so[109] fele sore,
    Þat he gan crien godes ore,
    Þat he sholde of his hend plette,                           2444
    Wolde{n} he nouht þer-fore lette,
    Þat he ne bounde{n} hond and fet:
    Daþeit þat on þat þer-fore let!
    But dunte{n} him so man doth bere,                          2448
    And keste him on a scabbed mere,
    Hise nese went un-to þe crice:
    So ledde{n} he þat fule swike,
    Til he was biforn hauelok brouth,                           2452
    Þat he haue[de] ful wo wrowht,
    Boþe with hungre[110] and with cold,
    Or he were twel winter old,
    And with mani heui swink,                                   2456
    With poure mete, and feble drink,
    And [with] swiþe wikke cloþes,
    For al hise manie grete othes.
    Nu beyes he his holde blame:                                2460
  [Sidenote: “_Old sin makes new shame._”]
    ‘Old sinne makes newe shame:’
    Wan he was [brouht] so shamelike
    Biforn[111] þe king, þe fule swike,
  [Sidenote: The king summons Ubbe and the rest.]
    Þe king dede ubbe swiþe calle                               2464
    Hise erles, and hise barouns alle,
    Dreng and thein, burgeis and knith,

[Headnote: HE IS CONDEMNED TO BE HUNG.]

    And bad he sholde{n} demen him rith:
    For he kneu, þe swike dam,                                  2468
    Euerildel god was him gram.
    He sette{n} hem dun bi þe wawe,
    Riche and pouere, heye and lowe,
  [Sidenote: They sit in judgment.]
    Þe helde men, and ek þe grom,                               2472
    And made þer þe rithe dom,
    And seyde{n} unto þe king anon,
    Þat stille sat [al] so þe ston:
  [Sidenote: “He is to be flayed, drawn, and hung.”]
    “We deme, þat he be al quic slawen,[112]                    2476
    And siþen to þe galwes drawe[{n}],
    At þis foule mere tayl;
    Þoru is fet a ful stro{n}g nayl;
  [Sidenote: [Fol. 216b, col. 2.]]
    And þore ben henged wit two feteres,                        2480
    And þare be writen þise leteres:
    ‘Þis is þe swike þat wende wel,
    Þe king haue reft þe lond il del,
    And hise sistres with a knif                                2484
    Boþe refte here lif.’
    Þis writ shal henge bi him þare;
    Þe dom is demd, seye we na more.”

      [Footnote 109: MS. fo.]

      [Footnote 110: MS. hungred.]

      [Footnote 111: MS. Brouht biforn; _but the word _brouht_
      clearly belongs to the preceding line, in which, however, it
      is omitted._]

      [Footnote 112: We should perhaps read _flawen_, as required by
      the sense. _See_ ll. 2495, 2502.]


[Headnote: GODARD IS FLAYED ALIVE AND HUNG.]

  [Sidenote: Godard is shriven.]
    +Hwan þe dom was demd and giue,                             2488
    And he was wit þe p{re}stes shriue,
    And it ne mouhte ben non oþer,
    Ne for fader, ne for broþer,
    Þat he sholde þarne lif;                                    2492
  [Sidenote: A lad flays him.]
    Sket cam a ladde with a knif,
    And bigan Rith at þe to
    For to ritte, and for to flo,
    And he bigan for to rore,                                   2496
    So it were grim or gore,
    Þat men mithe þeþen a mile
  [Sidenote: He roars.]
    Here him rore, þat fule file.
    Þe ladde ne let no with for-þi,                             2500
    Þey he criede ‘m{er}ci! m{er}ci!’
    Þat [he] ne flow [him] eueril del
    With knif mad of grunde{n} stel.
  [Sidenote: He is bound on an old mare, drawn over
  rough ground, and hung.]
    Þei garte bringe þe mere sone,                              2504
    Skabbed[113] and ful iuele o bone,
    And bunde{n} him rith at hire tayl
    With a rop of an old seyl,
    And drowe{n} him un-to þe galwes,                           2508
    Nouth bi þe gate, But ouer þe falwes;
    And henge [him] þore Bi þe hals:
    Daþeit hwo recke! he was fals.

      [Footnote 113: MS. Skabbeb.]


[Headnote: GODRICH RAISES AN ARMY AGAINST HAVELOK.]

    +Þa{n}ne he was ded, þat sathanas,                          2512
    Sket was seysed al þat his was
    In þe kinges hand il del,
    Lond and lith, and oþer catel,
  [Sidenote: Havelok makes Ubbe his steward.]
    And þe king ful sone it yaf                                 2516
    Vbbe i{n} þe hond, wit a fayr staf,
    And seyde, “her ich sayse þe
    In al þe lo{n}d, in al þe fe.”
  [Sidenote: He founds a priory of black monks for Grim’s soul,
  in the town of Grimsby.]
    Þo swor hauelok he sholde make,                             2520
    Al for grim, of monekes blake
    A p{ri}orie to s{er}uen inne ay
    Ih{es}u c{ri}st, til domesday,
    For þe god he haueden him don,                              2524
  [Sidenote: [Fol. 217, col. 1.]]
    Hwil he was pou{er}e and iuel[114] o bon.
    And þer-of held he wel his oth,
    For he it made, god it woth!
    In þe tun þer grim was graue{n},                            2528
    Þat of grim yet haues þe name.
    Of grim bidde ich na more spelle.[115]--
  [Sidenote: Godrich, earl of Cornwall, hears that Havelok
  has invaded England.]
    But wan godrich herde telle,
    Of cornwayle þat was erl,                                   2532
    (Þat fule traytour, that mixed cherl!)
    Þat hauelok was king of denemark,
    And ferde with him strong and stark,
    Comen engelond with-inne,                                   2536
    Engelond al for to winne,
    And þat she, þat was so fayr,
    Þat was of engelond rith eir,
    Þat was comen up at grimesbi,                               2540
    He was ful sorful and sori,
  [Sidenote: He says he will slay Havelok and his wife.]
    And seyde, “Hwat shal me to raþe?
    Goddoth! i shal do slou hem baþe.
    I shal don hengen hem ful heye,                             2544
    So mote ich brouke mi Rith eie!
    But yif he of mi lond[e][116] fle;
    Hwat? wende{n} he to desherite me?”
  [Sidenote: He raises a great army.]
    He dide sone ferd ut bidde,                                 2548
    Þat al þat euere mouhte o stede
    Ride, or helm on heued bere,
    Brini on bac, and sheld, and sp{er}e,
    Or ani oþer wepne bere,                                     2552
    Hand-ax, syþe, gisarm, or sp{er}e,
    Or aunlaz,[117] and god long knif,
    Þat als he louede leme or lif,
    Þat þey sholde{n} comen him to,                             2556
    With ful god wepne ye ber so,
  [Sidenote: The army is to meet at Lincoln on the 17th of March.]
    To lincolne, þer he lay,
    Of marz þe seue{n}tenþe day,
    So þat he couþe he{m} god þank;                             2560
    And yif þat ani were so rang,
    That he þa{n}ne ne come anon,
    He swor bi crist, and [bi][118] seint Iohan,
    That he sholde maken him þral,                              2564
    And al his of-spring forth with-al.

      [Footnote 114: The MS. has “we,” which the scribe several
      times writes instead of “wel.” But “wel” is a manifest
      blunder, since “iuel” is meant. Cf. l. 2505.]

      [Footnote 115: The author has here omitted to tell us that
      Havelok, at the desire of his wife, invades England. See the
      note.]

      [Footnote 116: Cf. l. 2599.]

      [Footnote 117: Printed “alinlaz” in the former edition. The
      first stroke of the _u_ is longer than the second, and the
      tail of the _x_ in the line above converts the second
      downstroke of the _u_ into an apparent _i_.]

      [Footnote 118: Cf. l. 1112.]


[Headnote: GODRICH EXCITES THE ENGLISH AGAINST HAVELOK.]

    +Þe englishe þat herde þat,
    Was non þat euere his bode sat,
    For he him dredde swiþe sore,                               2568
    So Runci spore, and mikle more.
  [Sidenote: [Fol. 217, col. 2.]]
    At þe day he come sone
    Þat he hem sette, ful wel o bone,
  [Sidenote: All come to Lincoln on that day.]
    To lincolne, with gode stedes,                              2572
    And al þe wepne þat knith ledes.
    Hwa{n} he wore come, sket was þe erl yare,[119]
    Ageynes denshe men to fare,
    And seyde, “lyþes me[120] alle samen,                       2576
    Haue ich gadred you for no game{n},
    But ich wile seyen you forþi;
  [Sidenote: Godrich tells them what Havelok is doing at Grimsby.]
    Lokes hware here at g{ri}mesbi,
    Hise uten-laddes here comen,                                2580
    And haues nu þe p{ri}orie numen;
    Al þat euere mithen he finde,
    He bre{n}ne kirkes, and p{re}stes binde;
    He strangleth mo{n}kes, and nu{n}nes boþe:                  2584
    Wat wile ye, frend, her-offe Rede?
    Yif he regne þus-gate longe,
    He Moun us alle ouer-gange,
    He moun vs alle quic henge or slo,                          2588
    Or þral maken, and do ful wo,
    Or elles reue us ure liues,
    And ure children, and ure wiues.
  [Sidenote: He excites them to attack Havelok.]
    But dos nu als ich wile you lere,                           2592
    Als ye wile be with me dere;
    Nimes nu swiþe forth and raþe,
    And helpes me and yu-self baþe,
    And slos up-o[n] þe dogges swiþe:                           2596
    For shal [i] neuere more be bliþe,

[Headnote: THE ENGLISH MARCH TO GRIMSBY.]

    Ne hoseled ben, ne of p{re}st shriuen,
    Til þat he ben of londe driuen.
    Nime we swiþe, and do hem fle,                              2600
    And folwes alle faste me,
  [Sidenote: He will lead them himself.]
    For ich am he, of al þe ferd,
    Þat first shal slo with drawe{n} swerd.
    Daþeyt hwo ne stonde faste                                  2604
    Bi me, hwil hise armes laste!”
  [Sidenote: Earl Gunter and Earl Reyner of Chester support him.]
    “Ye! lef, ye!”[121] couth þe erl gunter;
    “Ya!” quoth þe erl of cestre, reyner.
    And so dide alle þat þer stode,                             2608
    And stirte forth so he were wode.
    Þo mouthe me{n} se þe brinies brihte
    On backes keste, and late rithe,
    Þe helmes heye on heued sette;                              2612
    To armes al so swiþe plette,
    Þat þei wore on a litel stunde
  [Sidenote: [Fol. 217b, col. 1.]]
    Grethet, als me{n} mithe telle a pund,
    And lopen on stedes sone anon,                              2616
  [Sidenote: They approach Grimsby.]
    And toward g{ri}mesbi, ful god won,
    He foren softe bi þe sti,
    Til he come ney at grimesbi.

      [Footnote 119: _Or_ þare; but see l. 2954.]

      [Footnote 120: MS. mi. Cf. l. 2204.]

      [Footnote 121: MS. _has _þe_, _ƿe_, or _ye_ in both places._
      But see l. 1888.]


  [Sidenote: Havelok meets them boldly, and kills
  the foremost knight.]
    +Hauelok, þat hauede spired wel                             2620
    Of here fare, eueril del,
    With al his ferd cam hem a-geyn,
    For-bar he noþer knith ne sweyn.
    Þe firste knith þat he þer mette,                           2624
    With þe swerd so he him grette,
    For his heued of he plette,
    Wolde he nouth for sinne lette.
  [Sidenote: Robert kills a second.]
    Roberd saw þat dint so hende,                               2628
    Wolde he neuere þeþe[{n}] wende,
    Til þat he hauede anoþer slawen,
    With þe swerd he held ut-drawen.
  [Sidenote: William disables a third.]
    Willa{m} wendut his swerd vt-drow,                          2632
    And þe þredde so sore he slow,
    Þat he made up-on the feld
    His lift arm fleye, with the swerd.[122]

      [Footnote 122: Cf. l. 1825. We should otherwise be tempted
      to read _sheld_; especially as the _shield_ is more
      appropriate to the _left_ arm.]


[Headnote: COMBAT BETWEEN UBBE AND GODRICH.]

  [Sidenote: Hugh Raven seizes his sword, and cleaves
  an earl’s head in two.]
    +Huwe raue{n} ne forgat nouth                               2636
    Þe swerd he hauede þider brouth,
    He kipte it up, and smot ful sore
    An erl, þat he saw priken þore,
    Ful noblelike upon a stede,                                 2640
    Þat with him wolde al quic wede.
    He smot him on þe heued so,
    Þat he þe heued clef a-two,
    And þat bi þe shu[l]dre-blade                               2644
    Þe sharpe swerd let [he] wade,
    Þorw the brest unto þe herte;
    Þe dint bigan ful sore to smerte,
    Þat þe erl fel dun a-non,                                   2648
    Al so ded so ani ston.
  [Sidenote: Ubbe attacks Godrich.]
    Quoth ubbe, “nu dwelle ich to lo{n}ge,”
    And leth his stede sone gonge
    To godrich, with a god spere,                               2652
    Þat he saw a-noþer bere,
    And smoth godrich, and G{odrich} him,
    Hetelike with h{er}te grim,
  [Sidenote: Both fall.]
    So þat he boþe felle dune,                                  2656
    To þe erþe first þe croune.
    Þa{n}ne he wore{n} falle{n} dun boþen,
    Grundlike here swerdes ut-drowe{n},
  [Sidenote: [Fol. 217b, col. 2.]]
    Þat were{n} swiþe sharp and gode,                           2660
  [Sidenote: They fight on foot.]
    And fouhten so þei wore{n} wode,
    Þat þe swot ran fro þe crune
    [To the fet rith þere adune.][123]

[Headnote: GODRICH DISPLAYS GREAT PROWESS.]

    Þer mouthe men se to knithes bete                           2664
    Ayþer on oþer dintes grete,
    So þat with alþer-lest[e] dint
    Were al to-shiuered a flint,
  [Sidenote: The fight lasts from morn to night.]
    So was bi-twene{n} he{m} a fiht,                            2668
    Fro þe morwen ner to þe niht,
    So þat þei nouth ne bl[u]nne,[123*]
    Til þat to sette bigan þe su{n}ne.
  [Sidenote: Godrich wounds Ubbe sorely.]
    Þo yaf godrich þorw þe side                                 2672
    Vbbe a wunde ful un-ride,
    So þat þorw þat ilke wounde
    Hauede ben brouth to þe grunde,
    And his heued al of-slawen,                                 2676
  [Sidenote: Hugh Raven rescues him.]
    Yif god ne were, and huwe rauen,
    Þat drow him fro godrich awey,
    And barw him so þat ilke day.
    But er he were fro godrich drawe{n},                        2680
  [Sidenote: A thousand knights slain.]
    Þer were a þousind knihtes slawe{n}
    Bi boþe halue, and mo y-nowe,
    Þer þe ferdes to-gidere slowe.
    Þer was swilk dreping of þe folk,                           2684
  [Sidenote: The pools are full of blood.]
    Þat on þe feld was neu{er}e a polk
    Þat it ne stod of blod so ful,
    Þat þe strem ran i{n}til þe hul.
  [Sidenote: Godrich attacks the Danes like lightning.]
    Þo tarst[124] bigan godrich to go                           2688
    Vp-on þe danshe, and faste to slo,
    And forth rith also leuin fares,
    Þat neu{er}e kines best ne spares,
    Þa{n}ne his [he] gon, for he garte alle                     2692
    Þe denshe men biforn him falle.
    He felde browne, he felde blake,
    Þat he mouthe ouer-take.
    Was neuere non þat mouhte þaue                              2696
    Hise dintes, noyþer knith ne knaue,
  [Sidenote: He mows them down like grass.]
    Þat he felden so dos þe gres

[Headnote: COMBAT BETWEEN GODRICH AND HAVELOK.]

    Bi-forn þe syþe þat ful sharp is.
    Hwan hauelok saw his folk so brittene,                      2700
    And his ferd so swiþe littene,
    He cam driuende up-on a stede,
    And bigan til him to grede,
    And seyde, “godrich, wat is þe                              2704
    Þat þou fare þus with me?
  [Sidenote: [Fol. 218, col. 1.]]
    And mine gode knihtes slos,
    Siker-like þou mis-gos.
  [Sidenote: Havelok reproves Godrich, and bids him perform
  his oaths.]
    Þou wost ful wel, yif þu wilt wite,                         2708
    Þat aþelwold þe dide site
    On knes, and sweren on messe-bok,
    On caliz, and on [pateyn][125] hok
    Þat þou hise douhter sholdest yelde,                        2712
    Þan she were wi{n}na{n}[126] of elde,
    Engelond eueril del:
    Godrich þe erl, þou wost it wel.
    Do nu wel with-uten fiht,                                   2716
    Yeld hire þe lond, for þat is rith.
    Wile ich forgiue þe þe lathe,
    Al mi dede and al mi wrathe,
    For y se þu art so with,                                    2720
    And of þi bodi so god knith.”
  [Sidenote: Godrich refuses.]
    “Þat ne wile ich neu{er}e mo,”
    Quoth erl godrich, “for ich shal slo
    Þe, and hire for-henge heye.                                2724
    I shal þrist ut þi rith eye
    Þat þou lokes with on me,
    But þu swiþe heþen fle.”
    He grop þe swerd ut sone anon,                              2728
    And hew on hauelok, ful god won,
  [Sidenote: He cleaves Havelok’s shield in two.]
    So þat he clef his sheld on two:
    Hwan hauelok saw þat shame do
    His bodi þer bi-forn his ferd,                              2732
    He drow ut sone his gode swerd,
  [Sidenote: Havelok smites him down.]
    And smot him so up-on þe crune,
    Þat godrich fel to þe erþe adune.
    But godrich stirt up swiþe sket,                            2736
    Lay he nowth longe at hise fet,
  [Sidenote: Godrich rises, and wounds Havelok in the shoulder.]
    And smot him on þe sholdre so,
    Þat he dide þare undo
    Of his brinie ri{n}ges mo,                                  2740
    Þan þat ich kan tellen fro;
    And woundede hi{m} rith i{n} þe flesh,
    Þat tendre was, and swiþe nesh,
    So þat þe blod ran til his to:                              2744
  [Sidenote: Havelok is enraged, and cuts off his foe’s hand.]
    Þo was hauelok swiþe wo,
    Þat he hauede of him drawen
    Blod, and so sore him slawen.
    Hertelike til him he wente,                                 2748
    And godrich þer fulike shente;
    For his swerd he hof up heye,
  [Sidenote: [Fol. 218, col. 2.]]
    And þe hand he dide of fleye,
    Þat he smot him with so sore:                               2752
    Hw mithe he don him shame more?

      [Footnote 123: Cf. l. 1904.]

      [Footnote 123*: Changed by editor from “blinne”: see
      Emendations.]

      [Footnote 124: So in MS. _Qu._ faste, as in next line.]

      [Footnote 125: MS. _here repeats _messe_, by mistake. Read
      _pateyn_._ Cf. l. 187.]

      [Footnote 126: MS. wīman, _i.e._ wi{n}man _or_ wi{m}man; _but
      we are sure, from _l. 174_, that _wi{n}nan_ is meant._]


[Headnote: GODRICH IS BOUND AND FETTERED.]

    +Hwan he hauede him so shamed,
    His hand of plat, and yuele lamed,
    He tok him sone bi þe necke                                 2756
    Als a t{ra}ytour, daþeyt wo recke!
  [Sidenote: He has him bound and fettered, and sends him
  to the queen.]
    And dide him binde and fet{er}e wel
    With gode feteres al of stel,
    And to þe quen he sende him,                                2760
    Þat birde wel to him ben grim;
    And Bad she sholde don him gete,
    And þat non ne sholde him bete,
    Ne shame do, for he was knith,                              2764
    Til knithes hauede{n} demd him Rith.
  [Sidenote: When the English find out that Goldborough
  is the heiress, they submit to Havelok.]
    Þan þe englishe men þat sawe,
    Þat þei wisten, heye and lawe,
    Þat Goldeboru, þat was so fayr,                             2768
    Was of engeland rith eyr,
    And þat þe king hire hauede wedded,
    And haueden ben samen bedded,
    He comen alle to crie m{er}ci,                              2772
    Vnto þe king, at one cri,
    And beden him sone manrede and oth,
    Þat he ne sholde{n}, for lef ne loth,
    Neuere more ageyn him go,                                   2776
    Ne ride, for wel ne for wo.


[Headnote: THE ENGLISH SUBMIT TO GOLDBOROUGH.]

    +Þe king ne wolde nouth for-sake,
    Þat he ne shulde of hem take
    Manrede þat he beden, and ok                                2780
    Hold oþes swere{n} on þe bok;
  [Sidenote: Havelok wishes to show Goldborough to the English.]
    But or bad he, þat þider were brouth
    Þe quen, for hem, swilk was his þouth,
    For to se, and forto shawe,                                 2784
    Yif þat he hire wolde knawe.
    Þoruth hem wite{n} wolde he,
    Yif þat she aucte quen to be.


  [Sidenote: Six earls fetch her in.]
    +Sixe erles weren sone yare,                                2788
    After hire for to fare.
    He nomen on-on, and come{n} sone,
    And brouthe{n} hire, þat under mone
    In al þe werd ne hauede per,                                2792
    Of hende-leik, fer ne ner.
    Hwan she was come þider, alle
    Þe englishe men bi-gu{n}ne to falle
  [Sidenote: [Fol. 218b, col. 1.]]
    O knes, and grete{n} swiþe sore,                            2796
    And seyden, “leuedi, k[r]istes ore,
  [Sidenote: The English ask her pardon.]
    And youres! we haue{n} misdo mikel,
    Þat we ayen you haue be fikel,
    For englond auhte forto ben youres,                         2800
    And we youre me{n} and youres.
    Is non of us, yung ne old,
    Þat we ne wot, þat aþelwold
    Was king of þis kunerike,                                   2804
  [Sidenote: They admit she is heiress.]
    And ye his eyr, and þat þe swike
    Haues it halden with mikel wro{n}ge:
    God leue him sone to honge!”


[Headnote: GODRICH IS CONDEMNED TO BE BURNT.]

    +Quot[127] hauelok, “hwan þat ye it wite.                   2808
  [Sidenote: Havelok says they must pass judgment on Godrich.]
    Nu wile ich þat ye doun site,
    And after godrich haues wrouht,
    Þat haues in sorwe him-self brouth,
    Lokes þat ye deme{n} him rith,                              2812
    For dom ne spared[128] clerk ne knith,
    And siþen shal ich under-stonde
    Of you, after lawe of londe,
    Manrede, and holde oþes boþe,                               2816
    Yif ye it wilen, and ek rothe.”
    Anon þer dune he hem sette,
    For non þe dom ne durste lette,
  [Sidenote: They say he is to be bound on an ass’s back,
  taken to Lincoln, bound to a stake, and burnt.]
    And demden him to binde{n} faste                            2820
    Vp-on an asse swiþe un-wraste,
    Andelong, nouht ouer-þwert,
    His nose went unto þe stert;
    And so to lincolne lede,                                    2824
    Shamelike in wicke wede,
    And hwan he cam un-to þe borw,
    Shamelike ben led þer-þoru,
    Bisouþe þe borw, un-to a grene,                             2828
    Þat þare is yet, als[o] y wene,
    And þere be bunde{n} til a stake,
    Aboute{n} him ful gret fir make,
    And al to dust be brend Rith þere;                          2832
    And yet demde{n} he þer more,
    Oþer swikes for to warne,
    Þat hise childre{n} sulde þarne
    Euere more þat eritage,                                     2836
    Þat his was, for hise utrage.

      [Footnote 127: MS. Guot. Cf. l. 1954.]

      [Footnote 128: _Qu._ spares.]


    +Hwan þe dom was demd and seyd,
  [Sidenote: So he is laid on the ass, and burnt.]
    Sket was þe swike on þe asse leyd,
    And [led vn-]til[129] þat ilke grene,                       2840
  [Sidenote: [Fol. 218b, col. 2.]]
    And brend til asken al bidene.
    Þo was Goldeboru ful bliþe,
    She þa{n}ked god fele syþe,
    Þat þe fule swike was brend,                                2844
    Þat wende wel hire bodi haue shend,
  [Sidenote: Goldborough rejoices.]
    And seyde, “nu is time to take
    Manrede of brune and of blake,
    Þat ich se ride[{n}] and go:                                2848
    Nu ich am wreke[{n}][130] of mi fo.”

      [Footnote 129: MS. “And him til,” which is nonsense. See
      l. 2827.]

      [Footnote 130: See l. 2992.]


  [Sidenote: Havelok makes the English swear fealty.]
    +Hauelok anon ma{n}rede tok
    Of alle englishe, on þe bok,
    And dide hem grete oþes swere,                              2852
    Þat he sholde{n} him god feyth bere
    Ageyn alle þat wore{n} liues,
    And þat sholde ben born of wiues.


[Headnote: THE EARL OF CHESTER MARRIES GUNILD.]

    +Þa{n}ne he hauede[131] sikernesse                          2856
    Taken of more and of lesse,
    Al at hise wille, so dide he calle
  [Sidenote: He proposes that Earl Reyner of Chester shall
  marry Gunild, Grim’s daughter; and he will then always
  be his friend.]
    Þe erl of cestre, and hise men alle,
    Þat was yung knith wit-ute{n} wif,                          2860
    And seyde, “sire erl, bi mi lif,
    And þou wile mi {con}seyl tro,
    Ful wel shal ich with þe do,
    For ich shal yeue þe to wiue                                2864
    Þe fairest þing that is oliue.

[Headnote: HAVELOK REMEMBERS BERTRAM’S KINDNESS.]

    Þat is gu{n}nild of grimesby,
    Grimes douther, bi seint dauy!
    Þat me forth broute, and wel fedde,                         2868
    And ut of denemark with me fledde,
    Me for to burwe fro mi ded:
    Sikerlike, þoru his red
    Haue ich liued in-to þis day,                               2872
    Blissed worþe his soule ay!
    I rede þat þu hire take,
    And spuse, and curteyse make,
    For she is fayr, and she is fre,                            2876
    And al so hende so she may be.
    Þertekene she is wel with me,
    Þat shal ich ful wel shewe þe,
    For ich giue þe a giue,                                     2880
    Þat euere more hwil ich liue,
    For hire shal-tu be with me dere,
    Þat wile ich þat þis folc al here.”
    Þe erl ne wolde nouth ageyn                                 2884
    Þe king[e] be, for knith ne sweyn,
  [Sidenote: [Fol. 219, col. 1.]]
    Ne of þe spusing seyen nay,
    But spusede [hire] þat ilke day.
    Þat spusinge was god time maked,                            2888
  [Sidenote: They are married, and have five sons.]
    For it ne were neuere clad ne naked,
    In a þede samened two
    Þat cam to-gidere, liuede so,
    So þey dide[{n}] al here liue:                              2892
    He geten same{n} sones fiue,
    Þat were þe beste me{n} at nede,
    Þat mouthe ride{n} on ani stede.
    Hwan gu{n}nild was to cestre brouth,                        2896
  [Sidenote: Havelok remembers Bertram, the earl’s cook,
  and makes him Earl of Cornwall.]
    Hauelok þe gode ne for-gat nouth
    Bertra{m}, þat was the erles kok,
    Þat he ne dide calle{n} ok,
    And seyde, “frend, so god me rede!                          2900
    Nu shaltu haue riche mede,

[Headnote: BERTRAM MARRIES GRIM’S SECOND DAUGHTER.]

    For wissing, and þi gode dede,
    Þat tu me dides in ful gret nede.
    For þa{n}ne y yede in mi cuuel,                             2904
    And ich ne haue[de] bred, ne sowel,
    Ne y ne hauede no catel,
    Þou feddes and claddes me ful wel.
    Haue nu for-þi of cornwayle                                 2908
    Þe erldom ildel, with-uten fayle,
    And al þe lond þat godrich held,
    Boþe in towne, and ek in feld;
    And þerto wile ich, þat þu spuse,                           2912
    And fayre bring hire un-til huse,
  [Sidenote: He is to marry Levive, Grim’s daughter,
  who is as fair as a rose.]
    Grimes douther, leuiue þe hende,
    For þider shal she with þe wende.
    Hire semes curteys forto be,                                2916
    For she is fayr so flour on tre;
    Þe heu is swilk in hire ler
    So [is] þe rose in roser,
    Hwan it is fayr sprad ut newe                               2920
    Ageyn þe su{n}ne, brith and lewe.”
    And girde him sone with þe swerd
    Of þe erldom, bi-forn his ferd,
    And with his hond he made hi{m} knith,                      2924
    And yaf him armes, for þat was rith,
  [Sidenote: They are married.]
    And dide him þere sone wedde
    Hire þat was ful swete in bedde.

      [Footnote 131: MS. hauede{n}.]


  [Sidenote: Havelok and Goldborough lived 100 years,
  and had many children.]
    +After þat he spused wore,                                  2928
    Wolde þe erl nouth dwelle þore,
    But sone na{m} until his lond,
  [Sidenote: [Fol. 219, col. 2.]]
    And seysed it al in his hond,
    And liuede þer-i{n}ne, he and his wif,                      2932
    An hundred winter in god lif,[132]
    And gaten mani childre{n} samen,
    And liueden ay in blisse and game{n}.
    Hwa{n} þe maydens were spused boþe,                         2936
    Hauelok anon bigan ful rathe
  [Sidenote: The Danes are enriched.]
    His denshe men to feste wel
    Wit riche landes and catel,
    So þat he weren alle riche:                                 2940
    For he was large and nouth chinche.

      [Footnote 132: Between this line and the next are inserted
      in the MS. the words: _For he saw þat he_, which have been
      subsequently struck out by the same hand, and the word _vacat_
      affixed.]


[Headnote: HAVELOK IS CROWNED KING OF ENGLAND.]

    +Þer-after sone, with his here,
  [Sidenote: Havelok is crowned at London.]
    For he to lundone, forto bere
    Corune, so þat [alle] it sawe,                              2944
    Henglishe ant denshe, heye and lowe,
    Hwou he it bar with mikel pride,
    For his barnage þat was un-ride.


  [Sidenote: The feast lasts 40 days.]
    +Þe feste of his coruni[{n}]g[133]                          2948
    Laste[de] with gret ioying
    Fourti dawes, and sumdel mo;
    Þo bigu{n}nen þe denshe to go
    Vn-to þe king, to aske leue,                                2952
    And he ne wolde hem nouth g{re}ue,
  [Sidenote: The Danes return home.]
    For he saw þat he woren yare
    In-to denemark for to fare,
    But gaf hem leue sone anon,                                 2956
    And bitauhte hem seint Johan;
  [Sidenote: Ubbe is to rule Denmark.]
    And bad ubbe, his iustise,
    Þat he sholde on ilke wise
    Denemark yeme and gete so,                                  2960
    Þat no pleynte come him to.

      [Footnote 133: MS. corunig.]


  [Sidenote: Havelok remained in England for sixty years.]
    +Hwan he wore parted alle samen,
    Hauelok bi-lefte wit ioie and game{n}
    In engelond, and was þer-i{n}ne                             2964
    Sixti winter king with winne,
    And Goldeboru quen, þat I wene:
    So mikel loue was hem bitwene,
    Þat al þe werd spak of hem two:                             2968
    He louede hire, and she him so,
  [Sidenote: He and Goldborough were never apart.]
    Þat neyþer oþe[r] mithe be
    For[134] oþer, ne no ioie se,
    But yf he were to-gidere[135] boþe;                         2972
    Neuere yete ne were{n} he wroþe,
    For here loue was ay newe,
  [Sidenote: [Fol. 219b, col. 1.]]
    Neuere yete wordes ne grewe
    Bitwene hem, hwar-of ne lathe                               2976
    Mithe rise, ne no wrathe.

      [Footnote 134: _Qu._ Fro.]

      [Footnote 135: MS. togidede.]


[Headnote: SUCH IS THE “GESTE” OF HAVELOK.]

  [Sidenote: They had 15 children, all kings and queens.]
    +He geten childre{n} hem bi-twene
    Sones and douthres rith fiuetene,
    Hwar-of þe sones were kinges alle,                          2980
    So wolde god it sholde bifalle;
    And þe douhtres alle q{ue}nes:
    Him sto{n}des wel þat god child strenes.
  [Sidenote: Such is the _geste_ of Havelok and Goldborough.]
    Nu haue ye herd þe gest al þoru                             2984
    Of hauelok and of goldeborw.
    Hw he were{n} born, and hw fedde,
    And hwou he wore{n} with wro{n}ge ledde
    In here youþe, with trecherie,                              2988
    With tresoun, and with felounye,
    And hwou þe swikes hauede{n} thit
    Reuen hem þat was here rith,
    And hwou he were{n} wreken wel,                             2992
    Haue ich sey you eu{er}ildel;

[Headnote: SAY A PATERNOSTER FOR THE AUTHOR.]

    And forþi ich wolde biseken you,
    Þat haue{n} herd þe rim[e] nu,
  [Sidenote: Each of you say a _pater-noster_ for the author.]
    Þat ilke of you, with gode wille,                           2996
    Seye a pat{er}-nost{er} stille,
    For him þat haueth þe rym[e] maked,
    And þer-fore fele nihtes waked;
    Þat ih{es}u c{ri}st his soule bringe                        3000
    Bi-forn his fader at his endinge.


    +Amen.+




NOTES.


[The following notes are abridged from the notes in Sir F. Madden’s
excellent edition, the abridgement being effected almost entirely by
occasional omissions, and with but very slight unimportant changes of a
few words, chiefly in the case of references to later editions of
various works than were existing in 1828. I have added one or two short
notes upon difficult constructions, but these are distinguished by being
enclosed within square brackets. --W. W. S.]

9.

  _He was the wicteste man at nede
  That thurte riden on ani stede._

This appears to have been a favourite expression of the poet, and to
have comprehended, in his idea, the perfection of those qualifications
required in a knight and hero. He repeats it, with some slight
variation, no less than five times, viz. in ll. 25, 87, 345, 1757, and
1970. The lines, however, are by no means original, but the common
property of all our early poetical writers. We find them in Laȝamon:

  þis wes þe feiruste mon
  þe æuere æhte ær þusne kinedom,
  þa he mihte beren wepnen,
  & his hors wel awilden.

    _Laȝamon_, vol. i. p. 174.

So also in the Romance of _Guy of Warwick_:

  He was the best knight at neede
  That euer bestrode any stede.

    Coll. Garrick, K. 9. sign. Ll. ii.

Again, in the _Continuation of Sir Gy_, in the Auchinleck MS., (ed. for
the Abbotsford Club, 1840, 4to; p. 266),

  The best bodi he was at nede
  That ever might bistriden stede,
    And freest founde in fight.

And again, in the _Chronicle of England_, published by Ritson from a
copy in the British Museum, MS. Reg. 12. C. XII.

  After him his sone Arthur
  Hevede this lond thourh and thourh.
  He was the beste kyng at nede
  That ever mihte ride on stede,
  Other wepne welde, other folk out-lede,
  Of mon he hede he never drede. --l. 261.

The very close resemblance of these lines to those in Havelok, ll.
87-90, would induce a belief that the writer of the _Chronicle_ had
certainly read, and perhaps copied from, the Romance. The MS. followed
by Ritson was undoubtedly written soon after the death of Piers
Gaveston, in 1313, with the mention of which event it concludes; but in
the Auchinleck copy it is continued, by a later hand, to the minority of
Edward III. It only remains to be observed, that the poem in MS. Reg.
12. C. XII. is written by the same identical hand as the MS. Harl. 2253
(containing _Kyng Horn_, &c.), whence some additional light is thrown on
the real age of the latter, respecting which our antiquaries so long
differed.

[15. “And I will drink ere I tell my tale.” _Her_ = ere.

19. _And wite, &c._, i.e. And ordain that it may be so; cf. ll. 517,
1316. Both metre and grammar require the final _e_.]

31. _Erl and barun, _dreng_ and kayn._ The appellation of _Dreng_, and,
in the plural, _Drenges_, which repeatedly occurs in the course of this
poem, is uniformly bestowed on a class of men who hold a situation
between the rank of _Baron_ and _Thayn_. We meet with the term more than
once in Doomsday Book, as, for instance, in Tit. Cestresc: “Hujus
manerii [Neuton] aliam terram xv. hom. quos _Drenches_ vocabant, pro xv.
maneriis tenebant.” And in a Charter of that period we read: “Alger
Prior, et totus Conventus Ecclesiæ S. Cuthberti, Edwino, et omnibus
Teignis et _Drengis_, &c.” Hence Spelman infers, that the Drengs were
military vassals, and held land by knight’s service, which was called
_Drengagium_. This is confirmed by a document from the Chartulary of
Welbeck, printed in Dugdale, _Mon. Angl._ V. II. p. 598, and in Blount,
_Jocular Tenures_, p. 177, where it is stated, “In eadem villa [Cukeney,
co. Nottingh.] manebat quidam homo qui vocabatur Gamelbere, et fuit
vetus _Dreyinghe_ ante Conquestum.” It appears from the same document,
that this person held two carucates of land of the King _in capite_, and
was bound to perform military service for the same, whenever the army
went into Wales. In the Epistle also from the Monks of Canterbury to
Henry II. printed by Somner, in his Treatise on Gavelkind, p. 123, we
find: “Quia vero non erant adhuc tempore Regis Willelmi Milites in
Anglia, sed _Threnges_, præcepit Rex, ut de eis Milites fierent, ad
terram defendendam.” In Laȝamon’s translation of Wace the term is
frequently used in the acceptation of thayn, and spelt either
_dringches_, _drenches_, _dranches_, or _dringes_. [Cf. Sw. _dräng_, a
man, servant; Dan. _dreng_, a boy.] In the Isl. and Su. Goth. _Dreng_
originally signified _vir fortis_, _miles strenuus_, and hence Olaf,
King of Norway, received the epithet of _Goddreng_. See Wormii Lex. Run.
p. 26. Ihre, Vet. Cat. Reg. p. 109. Langebek, Script. Rer. Danic. V. I.
p. 156. The term subsequently was applied to persons in a servile
condition, and is so instanced by Spelman, as used in Denmark. In this
latter sense it may be found in Hickes, Diction. Isl., and in Sir David
Lyndsay’s Poems,

  Quhilk is not ordanit for _dringis_
  But for Duikis, Empriouris, and Kingis.

    V. Pinkerton’s Scotish Poems Reprinted, ii. 97.

V. Jamieson, Dict. _in voce_.

45.

  _In that time a man that bore
  (Wel fyfty pund, y woth, or more.)_

This insertion receives additional authority from a similar passage in
the Romance of _Guy of Warwick_, where it is mentioned as a proof of the
rigorous system of justice pursued by Earl Sigard,

  Though a man bore an hundred pound,
  Upon him of gold so round,
  There n’as man in all this land
  That durst him do shame no schonde.

    Ellis, _Metr. Rom._ V. II. p. 9. Ed. 1811.

Many of the traits here attributed to Athelwold appear to be borrowed
from the praises so universally bestowed by our ancient historians on
the character of King Alfred, in whose time, as Otterbourne writes,
p. 52, “armillas aureas in bivio stratas vel suspensas, nemo abripere
est ausus.” Cf. _Annal. Eccl. Roffens._ MS. Cott. Nero, D. II. The same
anecdote is related of Rollo, Duke of Normandy, by Guillaume de
Jumieges, and Dudon de Saint Quentin.

91. _Sprong forth so sparke of glede._ Cf. l. 870. It is a very common
metaphor in early English poetry.

  He sprong forð an stede,
    swa sparc ded of fure,

    _Laȝamon_ v. ii. p. 565.

  He sprange als any sparke one glede.

    _Sir Isumbras_, st. 39 (Camd. Soc. 1844)

  He spronge as sparkle doth of glede,

    _K. of Tars_, l. 194.

  And lepte out of the arsoun,
    As sperk thogh out of glede.

    _Ly Beaus Desconus_, l. 623.

Cf. Chaucer, Cant. Tales, l. 13833, and Tyrwhitt’s note.

110. _Of his bodi_, &c. Compare the French text, l. 208.

  Mes entre eus n’eurent enfant
  Mes qe vne fille bele;
  Argentille out non la pucele.
  Rois Ekenbright fut enfermez,
  Et de grant mal forment greuez;
  Bien siet n’en poet garrir.

[Here _Argentille_ is _Goldborough_, and _Ekenbright_ answers to
_Athelwold_. This quotation, and others below, shewing the passages of
the French text which most nearly resemble the English poem, are from a
MS. in the Herald’s College, marked E. D. N. No. 14. See the Preface.]

[118. _Wat shal me to rede_, lit. what shall be for a counsel to me. See
_Rede_ in the Glossary to _William of Palerne_.

130. _And don hem of þar hire were queme_, lit. and do them off where it
should be agreeable to her; i.e. and keep men at a distance as she
pleased. Such seems to me the meaning of this hitherto unexplained line.

132. For _me_ we ought probably to read _hit_.]

136. _He sende_ writes _sone onon._ We must here, and in l. 2275, simply
understand _letters_, without any reference to the official summonses of
parliament, which subsequently were so termed, κατ’ εξοχην. The word
_briefs_ is used in the same sense by the old French writers, and in
Laȝamon we meet with some lines nearly corresponding with the present;
see ll. 6669-6678.

[175. _þa_. Frequently written for _þat_. See _William of Palerne_.]

189-203. _Ther-on he garte_, &c. Compare the French Romance, ll.
215-228.

  Sa fille li ad comandée,
  Et sa terre tote liuerée.
  Primerement li fet iurer,
  Veiant sa gent & affier,
  Qe leaument la nurrireit,
  Et sa terre lui gardereit,
  Tant q’ele fust de tiel age
  Qe suffrir porroit mariage.
  Quant la pucele seit granz,
  Par le consail de ses tenanz,
  Au plus fort home la dorroit
  Qe el reaume troueroit;
  Qu’il li baillast ses citez,
  Ses chasteus & ses fermetez.

263.

  _Justises dede he maken newe,
  Al Engelond to faren thorw._

The earliest instance produced by Dugdale of the Justices Itinerant, is
in 23 Hen. II. 1176, when by the advice of the Council held at
Northampton, the realm was divided into six parts, and into each were
sent three Justices. _Orig. Judic._ p. 51. This is stated on the
authority of Hoveden. Dugdale admits however the custom to have been
older, and in Gervasius Dorobernensis, we find, in 1170, certain
persons, called _inquisitores_, appointed to perambulate England.
Gervase of Tilbury, or whoever was the author of the _Dialogus de
Scaccario_, calls them _deambulantes, vel perlustrantes judices_. See
Spelman, _in voc_. The office continued to the time of Edward III., when
it was superseded by that of the Justices of Assize.

280. _The kinges douther_, &c. Comp. the Fr. l. 283.

        Argentille,
  La meschine qu’ert sa fille,
  Que ia estoit creue & grant,
  Et bien poeit auoir enfant.

[338. _Sawe_, put for “Say we.” Cf. _biddi_ for “bidde i,” l. 484;
_hauedet_ for “hauede it,” 714; &c.

365. _His quiste_, &c. “His bequest made, and (things) distributed for
him.”]

433.

  _Crist warie him with his mouth!
  Waried wrthe he of north and suth!_

So, in the Romance of Merlin, Bishop Brice curses the enemies of Arthur,

  Ac, for he is king, and king’s son,
  Y curse alle, and y dom
  His enemies with Christes mouth,
  By East, by West, by North, and South!

    Ellis, _Metr. Rom._ V. I. p. 260.

[506. For _nouth_ we must read _mouth_ or _wolde_. The sense is-- “He
thought that he would he were dead, except that he might not (_or_ would
not) slay him with his (own) hand.”

550. The sense is-- “When he had done that deed (i.e. gagged the child),
_then_ the deceiver had commanded him,” &c.

560. _with_ may mean _knowest_, but this hardly gives sense. Perhaps we
should read _wilt_, i.e. “As thou wilt have (preserve) my life.”

567. Mr Morris suggests that the riming words are _adoun_ and _croune_.
We might then read--

  “And caste þe knaue so harde adoun,
  þat he crakede þer hise croune.”]

591. _Of hise mouth_, &c. Comp. the Fr. l. 71. sq.

  Totes les houres q’il dormoit,
  Vne flambe de lui issoit.
  Par la bouche li venoit fors,
  Si grant chalur auoit el cors.
  La flambe rendoit tiel odour,
  Onc ne sentit nul home meillour.

676. _And with thi chartre make (me) fre._ Instances of the manumission
of villains or slaves by charter may be found in Hickes, _Diss.
Epistol._ p. 12, Lye’s Dict. _ad calc._, and Madox’s _Formulare
Anglicanum_, p. 750. The practice was common in the Saxon times, and
existed so late as the reign of Henry VIII.

[694. _Wite he him onliue_, if he knows him (to be) alive.

701. It is evident that the words _and gate_ = and goats, must be
supplied. For the spelling _gate_, cf. _Pricke of Conscience_, ed.
Morris, l. 6134, where _gayte_ is used collectively as a plural.]

706. _Hise ship_, &c. Comp. the Fr. l. 89.

  Grim fet niefs apparailler,
  Et de viande bien charger.

715-720. _Hauelok the yunge_, &c. Comp. the Fr. ll. 97-105.

  Quant sa nief fut apparaillée,
  Dedenz fist entrer sa meisnée,
  Ses cheualers & ses serganz,
  Sa femme demeine & ses enfanz:
  La reyne mist el batel,
  Haueloc tint souz son mantel.
  Il meismes apres entra,
  A Dieu del ciel se comanda,
  Del hauene sont desancré,
  Car il eurent bon orré.

Instead of the storm, in the French text Grim’s ship is attacked by
pirates, who kill the whole of the crew, with the exception of himself
and family, whom they spare on the score of his being an old
acquaintance.

733-749. _In Humber_, &c. So in the Fr. _Ceo fut el north_, &c. Cf. ll.
122-135.

  Tant out nagé & tant siglé,
  Q’en vne hauene out parvenu,
  Et de la nief a terre issu.
  Ceo fut el North, a Grimesbi;
  A icel tens qe ieo vus di,
  Ni out onques home habité,
  Ne cele hauene n’ert pas haunté.
  Il i adresca primes maison,
  De lui ad Grimesbi a non.
  Quant Grim primes i ariua,
  En .ii. moitez sa nief trencha,
  Les chiefs en ad amont drescé,
  Iloec dedenz s’est herbergé.
  Pescher aloit sicome il soloit,
  Siel vendoit & achatoit.

753.

  _He took the sturgiun and the qual,
  And the turbut, and lax withal,
  He tok the sele, and the hwel_, &c.

The list of fish here enumerated may be increased from l. 896, and
presents us with a sufficiently accurate notion of the different species
eaten in the 13th century. Each of the names will be considered
separately in the Glossary, and it is only intended here to make a few
remarks on those, which in the present day appear rather strangely to
have found a place on the tables of our ancestors. The sturgeon is well
known to have been esteemed a dainty, both in England and France, and
specially appropriated to the King’s service, but that the whale, the
seal, and the porpoise should have been rendered palatable, excites our
astonishment. Yet that the whale was caught for that purpose, appears
not only from the present passage, but also from the Fabliau intitled
_Bataille de Charnage et de Caresme_, written probably about the same
period, and printed by Barbazan. It is confirmed, as we learn from Le
Grand, by the French writers; and even Rabelais, near three centuries
later, enumerates the whale among the dishes eaten by the Gastrolatres.
In the list of fish also published by Le Grand from a MS. of the 13th
century, and which corresponds remarkably with the names in the Romance,
we meet with the _Baleigne_. See _Vie Privée des François_, T. II.
sect. 8.

Among the articles at Archbishop Nevil’s Feast, 6 Edw. IV., we find,
_Porposes and Seales XII._ and at that of Archbishop Warham, held in
1504, is an item: _De Seales & Porposs. prec. in gross XXVI. s. VIII.
d._ Champier asserts that the Seal was eaten at the Court of Francis I.,
so that the taste of the two nations seems at this period to have been
nearly the same. For the courses of fish in England during the 14th and
15th centuries, see Pegge’s _Form of Cury_, and Warner’s _Antiquitates
Culinariæ_, to which we may add MS. Sloane, 1986. [_Cf._ _Babees Book,
&c._, ed. Furnivall, 1868, p. 153.]

[784. For _setes_ we should probably read _seten_ or _sette_, which
would be as good a rime as many others. The scribe has probably made the
rime more perfect than the sense. It must mean, “In the sea were they
oft set.” We cannot here suppose _setes_ = _set es_ = set them.]

839. _And seyde, Hauelok, dere sone._ In the French, Grim sends Havelok
away for quite a different reason, viz. because he does not understand
fishing.

903. _The kok stod_, &c. Comp. the Fr. l. 242.

  Et vn keu le roi le retint,
  Purceo qe fort le vist & grant,
  Et mult le vist de bon semblant.
  Merueillous fes poeit leuer,
  Busche tailler, ewe porter.

The last line answers to l. 942 of the English version.

939. _He bar the turues, he bar the star._ The meaning of the latter
term will be best illustrated by a passage in Moor’s _Suffolk Words_,
where, under the word _Bent_, he writes, “_Bent_ or _Starr_, on the N.W.
coast of England, and especially in Lancashire, is a coarse reedy
shrub--like ours perhaps--of some importance formerly, if not now, on
the sandy blowing lands of those counties. Its fibrous roots give some
cohesion to the silicious soil. By the 15 and 16 G. II. c. 33, plucking
up and carrying away _Starr_ or Bent, or having it in possession within
five miles of the sand hills, was punishable by fine, imprisonment, and
whipping.” The use stated in the Act to which the _Starr_ was applied,
is, “making of Mats, Brushes, and Brooms or Besoms,” therefore it might
very well be adapted to the purposes of a kitchen, and from its being
coupled with turves in the poem, was perhaps sometimes burnt for fuel.
The origin of the word is Danish, and still exists in the Dan. _Stær_,
Swed. _Starr_, Isl. _staer_, a species of sedge, or broom, called by
Lightfoot, p. 560, _carex cespitosa_. Perhaps it is this shrub alluded
to in the Romance of _Kyng Alisaunder_, and this circumstance will
induce us to assign its author to the district in which the Starr is
found.

  The speris craketh swithe thikke,
  So doth on hegge _sterre-stike_. --l. 4438.

945. _of alle men_, &c. Comp. the Fr. l. 254.

  Tant estoit franc & deboneire,
  Que tuz voloit lur pleisir fere,
  Pur la franchise q’il out.

959. _Of him ful wide the word sprong._ A phrase which from the Saxon
times occurs repeatedly in all our old writers. A few examples may
suffice.

  Beowulf wæs breme,
  Blæd wíde sprang.

    _Beowulf_, ed. Thorpe, p. 2.

  Welle wide sprong þas eorles word.

    _Laȝamon_, l. 26242.

  Of a knight is that y mene,
  His name is sprong wel wide.

    _Sir Tristrem_, st. 2, p. 12.

  The word of Horn wide sprong,
  How he was bothe michel and long.

    _Horn Childe_, ap. Rits. _Metr. Rom._ V. iii. p. 291.

See also the _Kyng of Tars_, ll. 19, 1007, _Emare_, l. 256, _Roland and
Ferragus_, as quoted by Ellis, _Ly beaus Desconus_, l. 172, and
_Chronicle of England_, l. 71.

984.

  _In armes him noman (ne) nam,
  þat he doune sone ne caste._

The same praise is bestowed on Havelok in the French text, l. 265,--

  Deuant eus liuter le fesoient
  As plus forz homes q’il sauoient,
  Et il trestouz les abatit--

and it was doubtless in imitation or ridicule of the qualities
attributed to similar heroes, that Chaucer writes of Sir Thopas, “Of
wrastling was ther non his per.” Cant. Tales, l. 13670.

1006. _To ben þer at þe parlement._ Cf. l. 1178. If we examine our
historical records, we shall find that the only parliament held at
Lincoln was in the year 1300, 28 Edw. I., and the writs to the
_Archbishop of York_, and other Nobles, both ecclesiastical and secular,
are still extant. The proceedings are detailed at some length by Robert
of Brunne, Vol. II. p. 312, who might have been in Lincoln at the time,
or, at all events, was sufficiently informed of all that took place,
from his residence in the county. If we could suppose that the author of
the Romance alluded to this very parliament, it would reduce the period
of the poem’s composition to a later date, than either the style or the
writing of the MS. will possibly admit of. It is therefore far more
probable the writer here makes use of a poetical, and very pardonable
licence, in transferring the parliament to the chief city of the county
in which he was evidently born, or brought up, without any reference
whatever to historical data.

1022.

  _Biforn here fet þanne lay a tre,
  And putten with a mikel ston_, &c.

This game of _putting the stone_, is of the highest antiquity, and seems
to have been common at one period to the whole of England, although
subsequently confined to the Northern counties, and to Scotland.
Fitzstephen enumerates casting of stones among the amusements of the
Londoners in the 12th century, and Dr Pegge, in a note on the passage,
calls it “a Welch custom.” The same sport is mentioned by Geoffrey of
Monmouth, among the diversions pursued at King Arthur’s feast, as will
appear in a subsequent note (l. 2320). By an edict of Edward III. the
practice of casting stones, wood, and iron, was forbidden, and the use
of the bow substituted, yet this by no means superseded the former
amusement, which was still in common use in the 16th century, as appears
from Strutt’s _Popular Pastimes_, Introd. pp. xvii, xxxix, and p. 56,
sq. In the Highlands this sport appears to have been longer kept up than
in any other part of Britain, and Pennant, describing their games,
writes, “Those retained are, throwing the _putting-stone_, or stone of
strength (_Cloch neart_) as they call it, which occasions an emulation
who can throw a weighty one the farthest.” _Tour in Scotl._ p. 214. 4to.
1769. See also _Statist. Account of Argyleshire_, xi. 287. In the French
Romance of Horn, preserved in MS. Harl. 527, is almost a similar
incident to the one in Havelok, and would nearly amount to a proof, that
Tomas, the writer of the French text of Horn, was an Englishman.

In the Romance of _Octovian Imperator_ it is said of Florent,

  At _wrestelyng_, and at _ston castynge_
  He wan the prys, without lesynge;
  Ther n’as nother old ne yynge
    So mochell of strength,
  That myght the ston to hys _but_ bryng,
    Bi fedeme lengthe. --l. 895.

It is singular enough, that the circumstance of Havelok’s throwing the
stone, mentioned in the Romance, should have been founded on, or
preserved in, a local tradition, as attested by Robert of Brunne, p. 26.

  Men sais in Lyncoln castelle ligges ȝit a stone,
  That Hauelok kast wele forbi euerilkone.

1077-1088. _The king Athelwald_, &c. Comp. the Fr. text, ll. 354-370.

  Quant Ekenbright le roi fini,
  En ma garde sa fille mist;
  Vn serement iurer me fist,
  Q’au plus fort home le dorroie,
  Qe el reaume trouer porroie.
  Assez ai quis & demandé,
  Tant q’en ai vn fort troué;
  Vn valet ai en ma quisine,
  A qui ieo dorrai la meschine; &c.

1103. _After Goldeborw_, &c. Comp. the Fr. l. 377.

  Sa niece lur fet amener,
  Et a Cuaran esposer;
  Pur lui auiler & honir,
  La fist la nuit lez lui gesir.

The French Romance differs here very considerably from the English, and
in the latter, the dream of Argentille, her visit to the hermit, and the
conversation relative to Havelok’s parents, is entirely omitted.

[1174. This may mean-- “He (Havelok) is given to her, and she has taken
(him)” --but this makes _yaf_ and _tok_ past participles, which they
properly are not; or else we must translate it-- “He (Godard) gave them
to her, and she took them,” i.e. the pence. This alone is the
grammatical construction, and it suits the context best; observe, that
the words _ys_ and _as_ are equivalent to _es_ = them. Cf. l. 970. See
Morris; _Gen. & Exod._, Pref. p. xviii.]

1203. _Thanne he komen there_, &c. Comp. the Fr. l. 556.

  A Grimesby s’en alerent;
  Mes li prodoms estoit finiz,
  Et la Dame q’is out nurriz.
  Kelloc sa fille i ont trouée,
  Vn marchant l’out esposée.

The marriage of Kelloc, Grim’s daughter, with a merchant is skilfully
introduced in the French, and naturally leads to the mention of Denmark.
The plot of the English story is wholly dissimilar in this respect.

1247. _On the nith_, &c. Comp. the Fr. l. 381.

  Quant couché furent ambedui,
  Cele out grant honte de lui,
  Et il assez greindre de li.
  As deuz se geut, si se dormi.
  Ne voloit pas q’ele veist
  La flambe qe de lui issist.

The voice of the angel is completely an invention of the English author,
and the dream (which is transferred from Argentille to Havelok) is
altogether different in its detail.

1260. _He beth heyman_, &c. Comp. the Fr. l. 521.

  Il est né de real lignage,
  Oncore auera grant heritage.
  Grant gent fra vers li encline,
  Il serra roi & tu reyne.

[1334. The words _euere-il del_ are corruptly repeated from line 1330
above. Perhaps we should read _wit-uten were_, i.e. without doubt.]

1430. _Hauede go for him gold ne fe._ Cf. l. 44. So in Laȝamon:

  Ne sculde him neoðer gon fore
  Gold ne na gærsume, &c.; vol. ii. p. 537.

[1444. The French text helps but little to supply the blank. It shows
that Havelok and his wife sailed to Denmark, and, on their arrival,
sought out the castle belonging to Sigar, who answers to the Ubbe of the
English version.]

1632. _A gold ring drow he forth anon_, &c. A similar incident, and in
nearly the same words, occurs in Sir Tristrem.

  A ring he raught him tite,
  The porter seyd nought nay,
        In hand:
  He was ful wis, y say,
  That first yave yift in land. --fytte i. st. 57, p. 39.

So also Wyntoun, who relates the subsidy of 40,000 moutons sent from
France to Scotland in 1353, and adds,

  Qwha gyvis swilk gyftyis he is wyse.

[See also _Piers Plowman_, Text A. iii. 202.]

1646. _Hw he was wel of bones_, &c. Comp. the Fr. l. 743.

  Gent cors & bele feture,
  Lungs braz & grant furcheure
  Ententiuement l’esgarda.

[1678. This line has two syllables too little.]

1722. _Thanne he were set_, &c. This is an amplification of the Fr.
l. 677, sq.

  Quant fut houre del manger,
  Et qe tuz alerent lauer,
  Li prodoms a manger s’assist,
  Les .iii. valez seeir i fist,
  Argentille lez son seignur;
  Serui furent a grant honur.

1726. _Kranes, swannes, veneysun_, &c. We have here the principal
constituents of what formed the banquets of our ancestors. The old
Romances abound with descriptions of this nature, which coincide exactly
with the present. See _Richard Cœur de Lion_, l. 4221; _Guy of Warwick;
The Squyr of Lowe Degre_, l. 317; and _Morte Arthure_, ed. Perry, p. 7.

“Wine is common,” says Dr Pegge, speaking of the entertainments of the
14th century, “both red and white. This article they partly had of their
own growth, and partly by importation from France and Greece.” A few
examples will illustrate this:

  He laid the cloth, and set forth bread,
  And also wine, both _white and red_.

    _Sir Degore_, ap. Ellis, _Metr. Rom._ V. 3, p. 375.

  And dronke wyn, and eke pyment,
  _Whyt and red_, al to talent.

    _Kyng Alisaunder_, l. 4178.

[Cf. _Piers Plowman_, Text B, at the end of the _Prologue_.]

In the _Squyr of Lowe Degre_ is a long list of these wines, which has
received considerable illustration in the curious work of Dr Henderson.

[1736. I print _kiwing_, as in Sir F. Madden’s edition; but I quite give
up the meaning of it, and doubt if it is put for _kirving_. The word is
obscurely written, and looks like _kilþing_, and my impression is that
it is miswritten for _ilk þing_, the word _þe_ being put for _þer_, as
frequently elsewhere. We should thus get _hwan he haueden þer ilk þing
deled_, when they had there distributed every thing. This is, at any
rate, the sense of the passage.]

1749. _And sende him unto the greyues._ In the French, Havelok is simply
sent to an _ostel_, and the _greyve_ does not appear in the story.

1806. _Hauelok lifte up_, &c. In the French, all the amusing details
relative to Robert and Huwe Raven are omitted, and Havelok is made to
retire to a monastery, where he defends himself by throwing down the
stones on his assailants.

[1826. _wolde_, offered at, intended to hit, _would_ have hit.]

1838.

  _And shoten on him, so don on bere
  Dogges, that wolden him to-tere._

The same comparison is made use of in the Romance of Horn Childe:

  The Yrise folk about him yode,
  As hondes do to bare.

    Rits. _Metr. Rom._ V. III. p. 289.

See Note on l. 2320.

[1914. “Cursed be he who cares! for they deserved it! What did they?
There were they worried.” A mark of interrogation seems required after
_dide he_.]

1926-1930. _Sket cam tiding_, &c. Comp. the Fr. l. 719.

  La nouele vint a chastel,
  Au seneschal, qui n’est pas bel,
  Qe cil qu’il auoit herbergé
  Cinc de ses homes out tué.

[1932. Apparently corrupt. Perhaps _is_ should be _it_. “That this
strife--as to what it meant.”]

2045. _That weren of Kaym kin and Eues._ The odium affixed to the
supposed progeny of Cain, and the fables engrafted on it, owe their
origin to the theological opinions of the Middle Ages, which it is not
worth while to trace to their authors. See _Beowulf_, ed. Thorpe, p. 8;
and _Piers Plowman_, A. X. 135-156; answering to p. 177 of Whitaker’s
edition. See also the Romance of _Kyng Alisaunder_:

  And of Sab the duk Mauryn,
  He was of _Kaymes kunrede_. --l. 1932.

In _Ywaine and Gawaine_, l. 559, the Giant is called “the karl of
_Kaymes kyn_,” and so also in a poem printed by Percy, intitled _Little
John Nobody_, written about the year 1550.

  Such caitives count to be come of Cain’s kind.

    _Anc. Reliq._ V. II. p. 130. Ed. 1765.

2076.

  _It ne shal no thing ben bitwene
  Thi bour and min, also y wene,
  But a fayr firrene wowe._

These lines will receive some illustration from a passage in Sir
Tristrem, where it is said,

  A borde he tok oway
    Of her bour. --p. 114.

On which Sir W. Scott remarks, “The bed-chamber of the queen was
constructed of wooden boards or shingles, of which one could easily be
removed.” This will explain the line which occurs below, 2106, “He stod,
and totede in at a bord.”

2092. _Aboute the middel_, &c. In the French, a person is placed by the
Seneschal to watch, who first discovers the light.

2132. _Bi the pappes he leyen naked._ “From the latter end of the 13th
to near the 16th century, all ranks, and both sexes, were universally in
the habit of sleeping quite naked. This custom is often alluded to by
Chaucer, Gower, Lydgate, and all our ancient writers.” Ellis, SPEC.
METR. ROM. V. I. p. 324, 4th Ed. In the _Squyr of Lowe Degre_ is a
remarkable instance of this fact:

  How she rose, that lady dere,
  To take her leue of that squyer;
  Al so naked as she was borne
  She stod her chambre-dore beforne. --l. 671.

The custom subsisted both in England and France to a very recent period,
and hence probably was derived the phrase _naked-bed_, illustrated so
copiously by Archdeacon Nares in his Glossary.

2192. Cf. the French, l. 843.

  Ses chapeleins fet demander,
  Ses briefs escriure & enseeler;
  Par ses messages les manda,
  Et pur ses amis enuoia;
  Pur ses homes, pur ses parenz;
  Mult i assembla granz genz.

[2201. Read _ne neme_ = took not, sc. their way, just as in l. 1207.]

2240-2265. _Lokes, hware he stondes her_, &c. Comp. the Fr. ll. 913-921.

  “Veez ci nostre dreit heir,
  Bien en deuom grant ioie aueir.”
  Tut primerain se desafubla,
  Par deuant lui s’agenuilla;
  Sis homs deuint, si li iura
  Qe leaument le seruira.
  Li autre sont apres alé,
  Chescuns de bone volenté;
  Tuit si home sont deuenu.

2314.

  _Vbbe dubbede him to knith,
  With a swerd ful swithe brith._

So likewise in the Fr. l. 928, _A cheualier l’out adubbé_. The ceremony
of knighthood is described with greater minuteness in the Romance of _Ly
beaus Desconus_, l. 73; and see _Kyng Horn_, ed. Lumby, ll. 495-504.

2320. _Hwan he was king, ther mouthe men se_, &c. Ritson has justly
remarked, Notes to _Ywaine and Gawaine_, l. 15, that the elaborate
description of Arthur’s feast at Carlisle, given by Geoffrey of
Monmouth, l. ix. c. 12, has served as a model to all his successors. The
original passage stands thus in a fine MS. of the 13th century, MS.
Harl. 3773. fol. 33 _b_. “Refecti autem epulis diversos ludos acturi
campos extra civitatem adeunt. Tunc milites simulachra belli scientes
_equestrem ludum_ componunt, mulieribus ab edito murorum aspicientibus.
Alii _cum cestibus_, alii _cum hastis_, alii _gravium lapidum jactu_,
alii _cum facis_, [_saxis_, Edd.] alii _cum aleis_, diversisque alii
alteriusmodi jocis contendentes.” In the translation of this description
by Wace we approach still nearer to the imitation of the Romance before
us.

  A plusurs iuis se departirent,
  Li vns alerent _buhurder_,
  E lur ignels cheuals mustrer,
  Li altre alerent _eskermir_,
  V _pere geter_, v _saillir_;
  Tels i-aueit ki _darz lanconent_,
  E tels i-aueit ki _lutouent_:
  Chescon del gru [geu?] s’entremetait
  Dunt entremettre se saueit. --MS. Reg. 13. A. xxi.

The parallel versions, from the French, of Laȝamon, Robert of
Gloucester, and Robert of Brunne, may be read in Mr Ellis’s _Specimens
of Early English Poets_. At the feast of Olimpias, described in the
Romance of _Kyng Alisaunder_, we obtain an additional imitation.

  Withoute theo toun was mury,
  Was reised ther al maner pley;
  There was knyghtis _turnyng_,
  There was maidenes carolyng,
  There was champions _skyrmyng_,
  Of heom and of other _wrastlyng_,
  Of liouns chas, of _beore baityng_,
  And _bay of bor_, of _bole slatyng_. --l. 193. Cf. l. 1045.

Some additional illustrations on each of the amusements named in our
text may not be unacceptable:

1. _Buttinge with sharpe speres._ This is tilting, or justing, expressed
in Wace by _buhurder_. See Strutt’s _Sports and Pastimes_, p. 96, sq.
108.

2. _Skirming with taleuaces._ This is described more at large by Wace,
in his account of the feast of Cassibelaunus. Cf. _Laȝamon_, v. i.
p. 347; l. 8144. In Strutt’s _Sports and Pastimes_ is a representation
of this game, taken from MS. Bodl. 264, illuminated between 1338 and
1344, in which the form of the _talevas_ is accurately defined. It
appears to have been pursued to such an excess, as to require the
interference of the crown, for in 1286 an edict was issued by Edward I.
prohibiting all persons _Eskirmer au bokeler_. This, however, had only a
temporary effect in restraining it, and in later times, under the
appellation of _sword and buckler play_, it again became universally
popular.

3. _Wrastling with laddes, puttinge of ston._ See the notes on ll. 984
and 1022.

4. _Harping and piping._ This requires no illustration.

5. _Leyk of mine, of hasard ok._ Among the games mentioned at the
marriage of Gawain, in the Fabliau of _Le Chevalier à l’Epée_, we have:

  Cil Chevalier jeuent as tables,
  Et as eschés de l’autre part,
  O à la _mine_, o à _hazart_.

Le Grand, in his note on this passage, T. i. p. 57, Ed. 1779, writes:
“Le Hasard était une sorte de jeu de dez. Je ne connais point la _Mine_;
j’ai trouvé seulement ailleurs un passage qui prouve que ce jeu était
tres-dangereux, et qu’on pouvait s’y ruiner en peu de tems.” It appears
however from the Fabliau of _Du Prestre et des deuz Ribaus_, to have
been certainly a species of _Tables_, or _Backgammon_, and to have been
played with dice, on a board called _Minete_. The only passage we
recollect in which any further detail of this game is given, is that of
Wace, in the account of Arthur’s feast, Harl. MS. 6508, and MS. Cott.
Vit. A. x., but it must be remarked, that the older copy 13 A. xxi. does
not contain it, nor is it found in the translations of Laȝamon, or
Robert of Gloucester.

6. _Romanz reding._ See Sir W. Scott’s note on Sir Tristrem, p. 290,
[p. 306, ed. 1811]; and the Dissertations of Percy, Ritson, and Ellis.

7.

  _Ther mouthe men se the boles beyte,
  And the bores, with hundes teyte._

Cf. ll. 1838, 2438. Both these diversions are mentioned by Lucianus, in
his inedited tract _De laude Cestriæ_, MS. Bodl. 672, who is supposed by
Tanner to have written about A.D. 1100, but who must probably be placed
near half a century later. They formed also part of the amusements of
the Londoners in the 12th century, as we learn from Fitzstephen, p. 77,
and are noticed in the passage above quoted from the Romance of _Kyng
Alisaunder_. In later times, particularly during the 16th century, these
cruel practices were in the highest estimation, as we learn from
Holinshed, Stowe, Laneham, &c. See Strutt’s _Sports and Pastimes_,
p. 192, and the plate from MS. Reg. 2. B. vii. Also Pegge’s Dissertation
on Bull-baiting, inserted in Vol. ii. of Archæologia.

8. _Ther mouthe men se hw Grim greu._ If this is to be understood of
scenic representation (and we can scarcely view it in any other light),
it will present one of the earliest instances on record of any attempt
to represent an historical event, or to depart from the religious
performances, which until a much later period were the chief, and almost
only, efforts towards the formation of the drama. Of course, the words
of the writer must be understood to refer to the period in which he
lived, i.e. according to our supposition, about the end of Hen. III’s
reign, or beginning of Edw. I. See Le Grand’s notes to the _Lai de
Courtois_, V. i. p. 329, and Strutt’s _Sports and Pastimes_, B. 3,
ch. 2.

2344. _The feste fourti dawes sat._ Cf. l. 2950. This is borrowed also
from Geoffrey, and is the usual term of duration fixed in the Romances.

  Fourty dayes hy helden feste,
  Ryche, ryall, and oneste. --_Octouian Imperator_, l. 73.

  Fourty dayes leste the feste. --_Launfal_, l. 631.

  And certaynly, as the story sayes,
  The revell lasted forty dayes.

    _Squyr of Lowe Degre_, l. 1113.

2384. The French story here differs wholly from the English. Instead of
the encounter of Robert and Godard, and the cruel punishment inflicted
on the latter, in the French is a regular battle between the forces of
Havelok and Hodulf (Godard). A single combat takes place between the two
leaders, in which Hodulf is slain.

2450. Cf. ll. 2505 and 2822. This appears to have been a common, but
barbarous, method in former times of leading traitors or malefactors to
execution. Thus in the Romance of Kyng Alisaunder, the treatment of the
murderers of Darius is described:

  He dude quyk harnesche hors,
  And sette theron heore cors,
  Hyndeforth they seten, saun faile;
  In heore hand they hulden theo tailes. --l. 4708.

2461. We find a similar proverb in the _Historie de Melusine, tirée des
Chroniques de Poitou_, &c. 12mo. Par. 1698, in which (at p. 72) Thierry,
Duke of Bretagne, says to Raimondin;-- “Vous autorisez par votre silence
_notre Proverbe_, qui dit, _Qu’un vieux peché fait nouvelle vergogne_.”

2513. _Sket was seysed_, &c. Comp. the Fr. l. 971.

  Apres cest fet, ad receu
  Le regne q’a son piere fu.

2516.

  _And the king ful sone it yaf
  Vbbe in the hond, wit a fayr staf._

So in _Sir Tristrem_:

  Rohant he yaf _the wand_,
  And bad him sitte him bi,
                  That fre;
  ‘Rohant lord mak y
  To held this lond of me.’ --fytte i. st. 83; p. 52.

The editor is clearly mistaken in explaining the _wand_ to be a
_truncheon_, or _symbol of power_. For the custom of giving seisin or
investiture _per fustim_, and _per baculum_, see Madox’s _Formul.
Anglican._ pref. p. ix. and Spelman, Gloss. in v. _Investire_, and
_Traditio_. The same usage existed in France, _par rain et par baton_.

2521.

  _----of monekes blake
  A priorie to seruen inne ay._

The allusion here may be made either to the Abbey of Wellow, in Grimsby,
which was a monastery of _Black Canons_, said to have been built about
A.D. 1110, or (what is more probable) to the Augustine Friary of Black
Monks, which is stated in the _Monumental Antiquities of Grimsby_, by
the Rev. G. Oliver, to have been “founded _about_ the year 1280,”
p. 110. No notice of it occurs in Tanner till the year 1304. Pat. 33
Edw. I. Some old walls of this edifice, which was dissolved in 1543,
still remain, and the site is still called “The Friars.” If the
connection between this foundation and the one recorded in the poem be
considered valid, the date of the composition must be referred to
_rather_ a later period than we wish to admit.

2530. The French supplies what is here omitted, viz. that Havelok sails
to England by the persuasion of his wife.

[Indeed, ll. 979-1006 of the French text may serve to fill up the
evident gap in the story; a translation of the passage is added, to shew
this more clearly.

  Quant Haueloc est rois pussanz,
  Le regne tint plus de .iiii. an
  Merueillos tresor i auna.

      When Havelok is a mighty king,
      He reigned more than 4 years,
      Marvellous treasure he amassed.

  Argentille li commanda
  Qu’il passast en Engleterre
  Pur son heritage conquerre,
  Dont son oncle l’out engettée,
  [Et] A grant tort desheritée.

      Argentille (Goldborough) bade him
      Pass into England
      To conquer her heritage,
      Whence her uncle had cast her out,
      And very wrongly disinherited her.

  Li rois li dist qu’il fera
  Ceo qu’ele li comandera.
  Sa nauie fet a-turner,
  Ses genz & ses ostz mander.

      The king told her that he would do
      That which she should command him.
      He got ready his fleet,
      And sent for his men and his hosts.

  En mier se met quant orré a,
  Et la reyne od lui mena.
  Quatre vinz & quatre cenz
  Out Haueloc, pleines de genz.

      He puts to sea when he has prayed,
      And took the queen with him.
      Four score and four hundred (ships)
      Had Havelok, full of men.

  Tant out nagé & siglé,
  Q’en Carleflure est ariué.
  Sur le hauene se herbergerent,
  Par le pais viande quierent.

      So far has he steered and sailed
      That he has arrived at Carleflure.
      Hard by the haven they abode,
      And sought food in the country round.

  Puis enuoia li noble rois,
  Par le consail de ses Danois,
  A Alsi qu’il li rendist
  La terre qe tint Ekenbright,
  Q’a sa niece fut donée,
  Dont il l’out desheritée;

      Then sent the noble king,
      By the advice of his Danes,
      To Alsi (Godrich)--that he should restore to him
      The land that Ekenbright (Athelwold) held,
      Which was given to his niece,
      And of which he had deprived her.

  Et, si rendre n’el voleit,
  Mande qu’il le purchaceroit.
  Av roi uindrent li messager--

      And, if he would not give it up,
      He sends word that he will take it.
      To the king came the messengers.]

The remainder of the French poem altogether differs in its detail from
the English.

2927. _Hire that was ful swete in bedde._] Among Kelly’s Scotch
Proverbs, p. 290, we find: “_Sweet in the bed_, and sweir up in the
morning, was never a good housewife;” and in a ballad of the last
century quoted by Laing, the editor of that highly curious collection,
the _Select pieces of Ancient Popular Poetry of Scotland_, we meet with
the same expression:

  A Clown is a Clown both at home and abroad,
  When a Rake he is comely, and _sweet in his bed_.

[2990. The last word is written _thit_ in the MS., but, as it rimes to
_rith_, we should suppose _tiht_ to be the word meant. _Thit_ cannot be
explained, but _tiht_ (or perhaps _tith_, according to our scribe’s
spelling) is the pp. of a verb signifying _to purpose_, which is the
exact meaning required. Cf.

        “And y to turne to þee have _tiȝt_;”
  i.e.  “I have resolved to turn to thee.”

_Political, Religious, and Love Poems_; ed. Furnivall, 1866; p. 177.]




GLOSSARIAL INDEX.


ABBREVIATIONS.

Barb. Barbour’s Bruce. --Chauc. Chaucer. --Doug. Gawin Douglas’s Transl.
of the Æneid. --Ellis, M. R. Ellis’s Specimens of Metrical Romances.
--Gl. Glossary. --Jam. Jamieson’s Dictionary. --Laȝam. Laȝamon’s Transl.
of Wace (ed. Madden). --Lynds. Sir D. Lyndsay’s Works. --N.E. Northern
English. --Percy, A. R. Percy’s Reliques of Ancient English Poetry.
--P. Plowm. Piers Plowman. --R. Br. Robert of Brunne. --R. Gl. Robert of
Gloucester, ed. Hearne (2nd ed. 1810). --Rits. A. S. Ritson’s Ancient
Songs. --Rits. M. R. Ritson’s Metrical Romances. --Sc. Scotch, Scotland.
--Sir Tr. Sir Tristrem. --Wall. Wallace. --Web. Weber’s Metrical
Romances. --Wilb. Wilbraham’s Cheshire Glossary. --Wynt. Wyntoun’s
Chronicle. --B. Lat. Barbarous Latin. --Belg. Belgic. --Fr. French.
--Isl. Islandic. --Lat. Latin. --S. Saxon. --Sibb. Sibbald’s Chronicle
of Scottish Poetry. --Su. G. Suio-Gothic. --Teut. Teutonic. --_q.v._
Quod vide. --The Romances separately cited are sufficiently indicated by
the Titles. The numbers refer to the line of the Poem.

It may be useful to add that the names of the Romances edited by Ritson
are-- vol. i. Ywaine and Gawin; Launfal. --vol. ii. Lybeaus Disconus;
King Horn; King of Tars; Emare; Sir Orpheo; Chronicle of England. --vol.
iii. Le bone Florence; Erle of Tolous; Squyr of Lowe Degre; Knight of
Curtesy. Those edited by Weber are-- vol. i. Kyng Alisaunder; Sir
Cleges; Lai-le-freine. --vol. ii. Richard Cœur de Lion; Ipomydon; Amis
and Amiloun. --vol. iii. Seuyn Sages; Octouian; Sir Amadas; Hunting of
the Hare. Beowulf and the Codex Exoniensis are quoted from Thorpe’s
editions.


A, 610, 936. Apparently an error of the scribe for _Al_, but perhaps
written as pronounced. N.E. and Sc. _aw_. V. Jam.

A before a _noun_ is commonly a corruption of the S. _on_, as proved
clearly by the examples in Tyrwhitt’s Gl., Jam., and Gl. Lynds. _Adoun_,
q.v. is an exception. _A-two_, 1413, 2643. _See_ On.

Aboven, _prep._ S. above, 1700.

Abouten, _prep._ S. [_on-bútan_] about, 521, 670, 1010, &c. _Abuten_,
2429.

Adoun, _adv._ S. down, 567. _Adune_, 2735. _Doun_, 901, 925, &c. _Dun_,
888, 927. _Dune_, 1815, 2656. A.S. _of-dúne_.

Adrad, _part. pa._ S. afraid, 278, 1048, 1163, 1682, 2304. _Adradde_,
1787. _Adred_, 1258. _Odrat_, 1153. Sir Tr. p. 174; K. Horn, 124. _See_
Dred.

Agen, _prep._ S. [_on-gean_] against, 1792. _Ageyn_, 493, 569, 2024, &c.
_Ageynes_, 2153, 2270, &c. _Ayen_, 489, 1210, 2799. _Yen_, 2271.
_Ageyn_, toward, 451, 1696, 1947; opposite to, 1809; upon, on, 1828.
_Ayen_, towards, 1207. _Ageyn him go_, 934, opposite him, so as to bear
an equal weight. _Ageyn hire_, 1106, at her approach. _Ageyn þe lith_,
2141, opposed to the light, on which the light shines. V. R. Gl.,
R. Br., Chauc. &c.

Ageyn, _adv._ S. again, 2426.

Al, _adv._ S. wholly, entirely, 34, 70, 139, 203, &c.

Al, _adj._ S. all, 203, 264, &c.; every one, 104; every part, 224;
_plu._ alle, 2, 150, &c.

Albidene, _adv._ _See_ Bidene.

Als, Also, Also, _conj._ S. [_eal-swá_] as, like, so, 306, 319, &c.
_Als_, 1912, as if. _Al so foles_, like fools, 2100. _Als_ is merely the
abbreviation of _Al so_; and the modern as is again shortened from
_als_. In Laȝamon it is often written _alse_, as in l. 4953.

  And he hæfde a swithe god wif
  & he heo leouede _alse_ his lif.

Cf. Havelok, l. 1663. _Als_ and _Also_ are used indifferently, and
universally by the old English and Scotch poets.

Alþer-beste, _adj._ S. best of all, 182, 720, 1040, 1197, 2415.
_Alþer-lest_, _Alþer-leste_, 1978, 2666, least of all. It is the gen. c.
pl. of _Alle_, joined to an adj. in the superl. degree, and is
extensively employed. _Alre-leofust_, _Alre-heudest_, _Alre-kenest_,
Laȝamon, _Althe-werste_, K. Horn, MS. _Alder-best_, _Alder-most_, R. Br.
_Alther-best_, _Alther-formest_, &c. Web. _Alther-furste_,
_Alther-next_, _Alther-last_, Rits. M. R. _Alder-first_, _Alder-last_,
_Alder-levest_, Chauc. _Alder-liefest_, Shakesp.

Amideward, _prep._ S. in the midst, 872. _Amiddewart_, K. Horn, 556.
_Amydward_, K. Alisaund. 690. _A mydward_, Ly Beaus Desc. 852.
_Amydwart_, Doug. Virg. 137, 35.

An. _conj._ S. and, 29, 359, &c. So used by Laȝamon, and still in
Somersetsh. V. Jennings. _Ant_, 36, 557, K. Horn, 9, &c.

And, _conj._ if, 2862.

Andelong, _adv._ S. lengthways, i.e. from the head to the tail, 2822.

  Ovyrtwart and _endelang_
  With strenges of wyr the stones hang. --_R. Cœur de Lion_, 2649.

Chauc. _endelong_, C. T. 1993.

Anilepi, _adj._ S. [_ánlepig_] one, a single, 2107. _Onlepi_, 1094. In
the very curious collection of poems in MS. Digb. 86 (written in the
Lincolnshire dialect, temp. Edw. I.) we meet with this somewhat rare
word:

  A! quod the vox, ich wille the telle,
  _On alpi_ word ich lie nelle.

    _Of the vox and of the wolf_ (Rel. Ant. ii. 275).

It occurs also in the Ormulum.

Anoþer, _adj._ S. _Al another_, 1395, in a different way, on another
project.

  Ah al hit iwruth _on other_
  Sone ther after.

    _Laȝamon_, l. 21005.

  Ac Florice thought _al another_.

    _Flor. and Blaunchefl._ ap. Ellis, M. R. V. 3, p. 125, ed. 1803.
    (Cf. Horn, ed. Lumby, p. 52, l. 32.)

Anuye, _v._ Fr. to trouble, weary, 1735; R. Gl., K. Alisaund. 876;
Chauc. Melibeus. _Noye_, Lynds. Gl. q.v.

Are, _adj._ S. former, 27. Cf. are, _adv._, Sir Tr. p. 32; Rits. M. R.,
Web., R. Gl., R. Br., Minot. p. 31. _Air_, _Ayr_, Sc. V. Jam. _See_ Er,
Or.

Aren, _1 and 3 p. pl._ S. are, 619, 1321, &c. _Arn_, Chauc.

Arke, _n._ S. Lat. a chest _or_ coffer, 2018. R. Br., Jam.

Armes, _n. pl._ Lat. arms, armor, 2605, 2613, 2925.

Arum for Arm, 1982, 2408.

Arwe, S. [_earg_] timid, 2115. Alter the punctuation, and read--

  He calde boþe arwe me{n} and kene,
  Knithes and serganz swiþe sleie.
  “Arwe or ferefulle. _Timidus._”

    Prompt. Parv. Cf. Stille, q.v.

As for Has, 1174.

Asayleden, _pa. t. pl._ Fr. assailed, 1862.

Asken, _n. pl._ S. ashes, 2841. _Aske_, R. Gl. _Askes_, R. Br. _Ashen_,
Chauc. _Assis_, Doug.

Astirte, _pa. t._ leaped, 893. _Astert_, King’s Quair, ap. Jam. _See_
Stirt.

At, _prep._ S. of _or_ to, 1387. Yw. and Gaw. (Rits.) 963. Still
existing in Scotland.

At-sitte, _v._ S. contradict, oppose, 2200. It corresponds with the term
_with-sitten_, 1683. In R. Gl. it is used synonymously with _at-stonde_.

  For ther nas so god knygt non no-wer a-boute France,
  That in joustes scholde _at-sitte_ the dynt of ys lance. --p. 137.

_See_ Sat.

Aucte, Auchte, Auhte, Authe, _n._ S. possessions, 531, 1223, 1410, 2215.

  And alle the _æhten_ of mine londe.

    _Laȝamon_, l. 25173.

_Aughtte_, K. Alisaund. 6884. _Aucht_, Doug. Virg. 72, 4; Lynds. Gl.

Aucte, Auht, Auhte, _v. imp._ (originally _pa. t._ of Aw, or Owe) S.
[_ágan_, _áhte_] ought, 2173, 2787, 2800. _Aught_, Sir Tr. p. 44.
_Ohte_, K. Horn, 418. _Aght_, Yw. and Gaw. 3229. _Aute_, R. Gl. _Aught_,
Chauc. Troil. 3, 1801. _Aucht_, Doug. Virg. 110, 33.

Aute, Awcte, (_pa. t._ of the same verb), possessed, 207, 743. _Aught_,
Sir Tr. p. 182. Ly Beaus Desc. 1027. _Oght_, Le bone Flor. 650. _Auht_,
R. Br. p. 126; Wynt., Lynds. Gl.

Aueden. _See_ Haueden.

Aunlaz, _n._ Anelace, 2554. “A kind of knife or dagger, usually worn at
the girdle.” Tyrw. note on Chauc. l. 359. So in Matth. Paris, “Genus
cultelli, quod vulgariter _Anelacius_ dicitur.” V. Gl. in voc. and
Todd’s Gl. to Illustr. of Chauc. In _Sir Gawan and Sir Galoran_, ii. 4,
an _anlas_ signifies a sharp spike fixed in the chanfron of a horse.
Probably from the Francic _Anelaz_, _Analeze_. V. Jam.

Auter, _n._ Fr. Lat. altar, 389, 1386, 2373. Sir Tr. p. 61, Octovian,
1312, R. Br., Chauc. _Awter_, Barb.

Ax, _n._ S. axe, 1776, 1894.

Ay, _adv._ S. ever, aye, always, 159, 946, 1201, &c. _Ae_, Sc. V. Jam.

Ayen. _See_ Agen.

Ayþer, _pron._ S. [_Ægþer_] either, each, 2665. _Eþer_, 1882. _Athir_,
Sc. V. Jam. _See_ Other.

Awe, _v._ S. to owe, own, possess, 1292. It may also very possibly be a
corruption of _Have_. Cf. ll. 1188, 1298.


Bac, _n._ S. back, 1844, 1950, &c; _backes_, _pl._ 2611.

Baldelike, _adv._ S. boldly, 53. _Baldeliche_, R. Glouc. _Baldely_,
R. Br., Minot, p. 20.

Bale, _n._ S. sorrow, misery, 327.

Bar. _See_ Beren.

Baret, _n._ (O.Fr. _barat_, Isl. _baratta_) contest, hostile contention,
1932.

  Ther nis _baret_, nothir strif,
  Nis ther no deth, ac euer lif.

    _Land of Cokaygne_, ap. Hickes, Thes. 1, p. 231.

  In alle this _barette_ the kynge and Sir Symon Tille a lokyng tham
  sette, of the prince suld it be don.

    _R. Brunne_, p. 216. Cf. p. 274.

  That mekill bale and _barete_ till Ynglande sall brynge.

    _Awntyrs of Arthure_, st. 23.

Barfot, _adj._ S. barefoot, 862.

Barnage, _n._ Fr. barons or noblemen collectively, baronage, 2947. Yw.
and Gaw. 1258. Web. Doug. Virg. 314, 48.

Barre, _n._ Fr. bar of a door, 1794, 1811, 1827. Synonymous with
Dore-tre, q.v. Chauc. C. T. 552.

Barw. _See_ Berwen.

Baþe, _adj._ S. both, 1336, 2543. _Bethe_, 694, 1680.

Be. _See_ Ben.

Be-bedde, _v._ S. to provide with a bed, 421.

Bede, _n._ S. prayer, 1385.

Bede, _v._ S. to order, to bid, 668, 2193, 2396; to offer, 1665, 2084,
2172. _Beden_, _pa. t. pl._ offered, 2774, 2780. _Bedes_, bids, 2392. Of
common occurrence in both senses. _See_ Bidd.

Bedden, _v._ S. to bed, put to bed, 1235. _Bedded_, _Beddeth_, _part.
pa._ put to bed, 1128, 2771.

Bedels, _n. pl._ S. beadles, 266. V. Spelm. in v. _Bedellus_, and
Blount, _Joc. Ten._ p. 120, ed. 1784.

Beite, Beyte, _v._ to bait, to set dogs on, 1840, 2330, 2440. _Bayte_,
R. Br. From the Isl. Beita, incitare; Su. Goth. _Beita biorn_, to bait
the bear. V. Jam. and Thomson’s Etymons.

Bem. _See_ Sunne-bem.

Ben, _v._ S. to be, 19, 905, 1006, &c. _Ben_, _pr. t. pl._ are, 1787,
2559. _Be_, _Ben_, _part. pa._ been, 1428, 2799. _Bes_, _Beth_, _imp._
and _fut._ be, shall be, 1261, 1744, 2007, 2246. _Lat be_, 1265, 1657,
leave, relinquish, a common phrase in the Old Romances. _Lat abee_, Sc.
V. Jam.

Benes, _n. pl._ S. beans, 769.

Beneysun, _n._ Fr. blessing, benediction. 1723. R. Br., Web., Chauc.
C. T. 9239. Lynds. Gl.

Bere, _n._ S. bear, 573, 1838, 1840, 2448.

Bere, Beren, _v._ S. to bear, to carry, 581, 762, 805. _Ber_, 2557;
_Bar_, _pa. t._ bore, 557, 815, 877. _Bere_, 974. _Beres_, _pr. t. pl._
bear. 2323.

Bermen, _n. pl._ S. bar-men, porters to a kitchen, 868, 876, 885. The
only author in which this term has been found is Laȝamon, in the
following passages:

  Vs selve we habbet cokes,
    to quecchen to cuchene,
  Vs sulue we habbet _bermen_,
    & birles inowe. --l. 3315.

  Weoren in þeos kinges cuchene
    twa hundred cokes,
  & ne mæi na man tellen
    for alle þa _bermannen_. --l. 8101.

Bern, _n._ S. child, 571. _Barn_, _bearne_, R. Br. _Bairn_, Sc.

Berwen, _v._ S. [_beorgan_] to defend, preserve, guard, 697, 1426;
_burwe_, 2870. _Barw_, _pa. t._ 2022, 2679. The original word is found
in Beowulf:

  Scyld-weall gebearg
  Líf and líce.
  (The shield-wall defended
  Life and body.) --l. 5134.

So in K. Horn, MS. Laud. 108.

  At more ich wile the serue,
  And fro sorwe the _berwe_. --f. 224_b_, c. 2.

Bes. _See_ Ben.

Bes for Best, 354.

Best, Beste, _n._ Fr. beast, 279, 574, 944, 2691.

Bete, _v._ S. [_beátan_] to beat, fight, 1899, 2664, 2763. _Beten_, _pa.
t. pl._ beat, struck, 1876. Chauc. C. T. 4206, to which Tyrwh. gives a
Fr. derivation.

Betere, _adv. comp._ S. better, 1758.

Beye, _v._ S. to buy, 53, 1654. _Byen_, 1625.

Beyes, _pr. t._ for Abeyes, S. suffers, or atones for, 2460.

  His deth thou _bist_ to night,
    Mi fo.

    _Sir Tristr._ p. 146.

  We shulden alle deye
  Thy fader deth to _beye_.

    _K. Horn_, 113.

  An of yow schall _bye_ thys blunder.

    _Le bone Flor._ 1330.

See Jam. in v. Aby. Web. Gl. and Lynds. Gl.; also Nares, v. Bye.

Bicomen, _pa. t. pl._ became, 2257; _part. pa._ become, 2264. _Bicomes_,
_imp. pl._ become (ye), 2303.

Bidd, Bidde, _v._ S. offer, 484, 2530; order, bid, 529, 1733. _Ut
bidde_, 2548, order out. _Biddes_, _pr. t._ bids, orders, 1232. _Bidde_,
to ask, 910. R. Glouc., Lynds. Gl. _See_ Bede.

Bidene, _adv._ forthwith, 730, 2841.

  “Rohand told anon
  His aventours _al bidene_.”

    _Sir Tr._ p. 45.

From Du. _bij dien_, by that.

Bifalle, _v._ S. to happen, befall, 2981. Bifel, _pa. t._ 824. _Fel_,
1009; appertained, 2359.

Biforn, _prep._ S. (1) before, 1022, 1034, 1364, &c.; _bifor_, 1357;
_biforen_, 1695; (2) in front of, 2406; _bifor_, 1812.

Bigan, _pa. t._ began, 1357. _Bigunnen_, _pl._ 1011, 1302. _Biginnen_,
_pr. t. pl._ begin, 1779.

Bihalue, _v._ S. to divide into two parts, or companies, 1834. _Halue_
occurs as a _noun_ in Chauc. Troil. 4, 945.

Bihel for Beheld, 1645. _Bihelden_, _pa. t. pl._ beheld, 2148.

Bihetet, _pa. t._ S. promised, 677. _Bihight_, Sir Tr. p. 105. _Behet_,
_Bihet_, R. Gl. _Be-hette_, R. Br. _Be-hete_, Web., Rits. M. R.
_Behighte_, Chauc.

Bihoten, _part. pa._ promised, 564. _Behighte_, Chauc.

Bihoue, _n._ S. behoof, advantage, 1764. R. Gl., R. Br., Chauc.

Bikenneth, _pa. t._ S. betokens, 1268. _Bikenne_, R. Br.

Bileue, _imp._ tarry, remain, 1228. Bilefte, _pa. t._ remained, 2963.
From _v._ S. _belifan_, to be left behind.

  Winde thai hadde as thai wolde,
  A lond _bilaft_ he.

    _Sir Tristr._ p. 29. Cf. pp. 38, 60.

  He schal wiþ me _bileue_,
  Til hit beo nir eue.

    _K. Horn_, ed. Lumby, 363.

  Horn than, withouten lesing,
  _Bilaft_ at hom for blode-leteing.

    _Horn Childe_, ap. Rits. M. R. V. 3, p. 298.

  Sojourn with us evermo,
  I rede thee, son, that it be so.
  Another year thou might over-fare,
  But thou _bileve_, I die with care.

    _Guy of Warw._ ap. Ellis, M. R. V. 2, p. 23.

See also the Gl. to R. Gl., R. Br. and Web., to which add _Emare_, 496,
and Gower, Conf. Am. This is sufficient authority for the reading
adopted in the text, and it may hence be reasonably questioned, whether
_bilened_ in Lye, and _belenes_ in _Sir Gawan and Sir Galoran_, i. 6,
quoted by Jamieson in v. Belene, be not the fault of the scribe, or of
the Editors.

Bimene, _v._ S. mean, 1259.

Binden, _v._ S. to bind, 1961. Used passively, 2820, as _Bynde_, 42.
_Bounden_, _pa. t. pl._ 2442. _Bunden_, 2506. _Bounden_, _part. pa._
545. _Bunden_, 1428.

Binne, _adv._ S. within, 584. _Byn_, Rits. M. R. _But and ben_, Doug.,
Virg., 123, 40; without and within. V. Jam., in v. Ben.

Birde. _See_ Birþe.

Birþe (_should rather be_ birþ), _3 p. s. pres._ it behoves, 2101.
_Hence_ birde, _3 p. s. pt. t._ behoved, 2761. A.S. _býrian_,
_gebýrian_, to fit, suit, be to one’s taste. See _Buren_ in Stratmann.

Birþene, _n._ S. burden, 900, 902.

Bise, _n._ Fr. a north wind, 724. _Bise traverse_, a north-west or
north-east wind. _Cotgr._

  Après grant joie vient grant ire,
  Et après Noel _vent bise_.

    _Rom. de Renart_, 13648.

The term is still in common use.

Biseken, _v._ S. to beseech, 2994.

Biswike, _part. pa._ S. cheated, deceived, 1249.

  Hu þu _biswikest_
  Monine mon.

    _Laȝam._ l. 3412.

_Byswuke_, K. Horn, 296; Yw. and Gaw. 2335. _Bisuike_, R. Br. _Beswyke_,
R. Cœur de L. 5918.

Bitaken, _v._ S. [_bitǽcan_, _tǽcan_] to commit, deliver, give in
charge, 1226. _Bitechen_, 203, 384, 395. _Bi-teche_, _pr. sing._ 384;
_imp. sing._ 395. Laȝam. 5316. _Bitake_, Sir Tr. p. 87. _Byteche_,
K. Horn, 577. _Biteche_, Web. _Betake_, _Beteche_, Chauc., Barb., Wall.
_Bitaucte_, _pa. t._ delivered, 206, 558. _Bitauhte_, 2212, 2317, 2957.
_Bitawchte_, 1224. _Bitawte_, 1408. _Tauhte_, 2214. _Bitæht_,
_Bitachet_, Laȝam. _Bitaught_, Sir Tr. p. 85. _Bitoke_, K. Horn, 1103.
_Betok_, Ly Beaus Desc. 82. _Betauht_, _bitauht_, _tauht_, _biteched_,
R. Br. Bitake, R. Gl. _Betake_, Sir Guy. _Betaught_, Chauc. _Betaucht_,
Doug., Lynds.

Bite, _v._ S. to taste, drink, 1731.

  Horn toc hit hise yfere,
  Ant seide, Quene, so dere,
  No beer nullich _bite_,
  Bote of coppe white.

    _K. Horn_ (Ritson), 1129.

Biþ for By the, 474. Cf. l. 2470.

Bituene, Bitwenen, Bitwene, _prep._ S. between, 748, 2668, 2967.

Blac, _adj._ S. black, 555, 1008. _Pl._ _Blake_, 1909, 2181, &c.

Blakne, _v._ S. to blacken in the face, grow angry, 2165.

  And Arthur sæt ful stille,
  ænne stunde he wes _blac_,
  and on heuwe swithe wak,
  ane while he wes reod.

    _Laȝam._ l. 19887.

  Tho Normans were sorie, of contenance gan _blaken_.

    _R. Brunne_, p. 183.

Blawe. _v._ S. to blow, 587. _Blou_, _imp._ blow, 585.

Blede, _v._ S. to bleed, 2403.

Bleike, _pl. adj._ bleak, pale, wan, 470. A.S. _blác_, bleak, Su.-G.
_blek_.

Blenkes, _n. pl._ blinks, winks of the eye, in derision, 307. R. Br.
p. 270; Sc. V. Jam. Suppl. Derived from S. _blican_, Su.-G. _blænka_,
Belg. _blencken_, to glance. _See_ Gl. Lynds.

Blinne, _v. n._ S. to cease, 2367, 2374. Sir Tr. p. 26; Rits. M. R.
Web., R. Gl., Chauc.; so in Sc. V. Jam. Gl. Lynds. _Blinne_, _pa. t.
pl._ ceased, 2670. _Blinneth_, _pr. t._ ceases, 329.

Blissed, _part pa._ S. blessed, 2873.

Bliþe, _adj._ S. happy, 632, 651.

Blome, _n._ S. bloom, flower, 63.

Bloute, _adj._ soft, 1910. Sw. _blöt_, soft, pulpy.

Bode, _n._ S. command, 2200, 2567. Sir Tr. p. 121, Web.

Bok, _n._ S. book, 1173, 1418, &c. _See_ Messe-bok.

Bole, _n._ [Isl. _bolli_, W. _bwla_. Cf. A.S. _bulluca_] bull, 2438.
_Boles_, _pl._ 2330.

Bon, Bone. _See_ O-bone.  [[under “On”]]

Bondemen, _n. pl._ S. husbandmen, 1016, 1308. R. Gl.

Bone, _n._ S. [_bén_] boon, request, 1659. Sir Tr. p. 31, and all the
Gloss.

Bor, _n._ S. boar, 1867, 1989. _Bores_, _pl._ 2331.

Bord, _n._ S. (1) table, 1722. K. Horn, 259; Rits. M. R., Web., Chauc.;
(2) a board, 2106. _See_ the note on l. 2076.

Boren, _part. pa._ S. born, 1878.

Boru, _n._ S. borough, 773, 847, 1014, 1757, 2086, 2826. _Borwes, pl._
1293, 1444, 1630. _Burwes_, 55, 2277. Sir Tr. pp. 12, 99. Chalmers is
certainly mistaken when he says it does not signify _boroughs_, but
_castles_. Introd. Gl. p. 200. In Laȝamon the word is always clearly
distinguished from _castle_, as it is in many other writers. V. Spelm.
in v. _Burgus._

Bote, _adv._ S. but, only, 721. _See_ But.

Bote, _n._ S. remedy, help, 1200. Laȝm., Sir Tr. p. 93; Web., Rits.
M. R., Rob. Gl., R. Br., Minot, Chauc., Doug., Lynds. Gl.

Boþen, _adj. pl._ S. both, 173, 697, 958; _g. c._ of both, 2223.

Bounden, Bunden. _See_ Binden.

Bour, Boure, Bowr, _n._ S. [_búr_] chamber, 239, 2072, 2076, &c. In
Beowulf the apartment of the women is called _Bryd-bur_; l. 1846.

  Ygarne beh to _bure_
  & lætte bed him makien.

    _Laȝam._ l. 19042.

Honder hire _boures_ wowe, _K. Horn_, 982, MS., where Rits. Ed. reads
_chambre wowe_. Cf. Sir Tr. p. 114; Rits. M. R., Web., R. Br., Doug., V.
Jam. _See_ note on l. 2076.

Bouthe, _pa. t._ S. bought, 875, 968. Cf. Sir Tr. p. 104.

Bouth, _part. pa._ bought, 883.

Boyes, _n. pl._ S. boys, men, 1899.

Brayd, _pa. t._ S. (1) started, 1282. Chauc., Gaw. and Gal. iii. 21;
R. Hood, ii. p. 83; (2) drew out, 1825, a word particularly applied to
the action of drawing a sword from the scabbard.

  Sone his sweord he ut _abræid_.

    _Laȝam._ l. 26533.

Cf. Am. and Amil. 1163; Sir Ferumbras, ap. Ellis, M. R. V. 2, p. 387.
Rauf Coilzear, ap. Laing, and Wall. i. 223.

Brede, _n._ S. bread, 98. _Bred_, 1879.

Breken, _v._ S. to break, 914. _Broken_, _pa. t. pl._ broke, 1238.

Brennen, Brenne, _v._ S. to burn, 916, 1162; Rits. M. R., Rob. Gl.,
R. Br., Chauc. _Brenden_, _pa. t. pl._ burnt, 594, 2125. _Brend_, _part.
pa._ burnt, 2832, 2841, &c. Sir Tr. p. 93.

Brenne. _See_ On brenne.

Brigge, _n._ S. bridge, 875. Sir Tr. p. 148. Still used in Sc. and N.E.

Brihte. _See_ Brith.

Brim, _adj._ S. furious, raging, 2233; R. Br. p. 244; Chauc. Rom. Rose,
1836. _Breme_, Rits. M. R. It originally signified the sea itself, and
was afterwards used for the raging of the sea, Beowulf, l. 56; Compl. of
Scotland, p. 62. V. Jam.

Bringe, Bringen, _v._ S. to bring, 72, 185, &c.

Brini, Brinie, _n._ S. [Mœso-Goth. _brunjo_] cuirass, 1775, 2358, 2551.
_Brinies_, _pl._ 2610. Sir Tr. p. 20. _Burne_, Laȝam. _Brenye_, K. Horn,
719, MS. _See_ Merrick’s Gl. to Ess. on Anc. Armor. The _Brini_ then
worn was of _mail_, as appears from l. 2740, _Of his brinie ringes mo_.
Hence in Beowulf it is termed _Breostnet_, l. 3100; _Here-net_, 3110;
_Hringedbyrne_, 2495. So in the French K. Horn, MS. Douce, _Mes vnc de
sun halberc maele ne falsa._ _See_ Rits. Gl. M. R.

Brisen, _v._ S. to bruise, beat, 1835. _See_ To-Brised.

Brith, _adj._ S. bright, 589, 605, &c. _Brihte_, 2610. _Bryth_, 1252.
_Brithter_, _comp._ brighter, 2141.

Brittene, _part. pa._ S. destroyed, 2700; R. Br. p. 244. _Pistill of
Sussan_, ap. Laing. In Doug., Virg. pp. 76, 5; 296, 1, the verb has the
sense of _to kill_, which it may also bear here. See _Bruten_ in _Will.
of Palerne_.

Brod, _adj._ S. broad, 1647.

Broucte, _pa. t. and pp._ brought, 767. _Brouht_, 1979. _Broute_, 2868.
_Brouth_, 336, 64. _Browt_, 2412. _Browth_, 2052. _Brouct of liue_, 513,
2412, dead. _Brouthen_, _pl._ brought, 2791.

Brouke, _1 p. pres. sing._ S. brook, enjoy, use, 311, 1743, 2545 (cf.
Ch. _Non. Pr. Ta._ 480).

  So _brouke_ thou thi croune!

    _K. Horn_, 1041.

Cf. Rits. Gl. M. R., Rich. C. de Lion, 4578; Chauc. C. T. 10182, 15306,
R. Hood, V. i. 48, ii. 112; Lynds. Gl. Percy, A. R. In Sc. _Bruike._
With these numerous instances before him, it is inconceivable how
Jamieson, except from a mere love of his own system, should write:
‘There is no evidence that the Engl. _brook_ is used in this sense,
signifying only to bear, to endure.’

Broys, _n._ S. broth, 924. _Brouwys_, R. Cœur de L. 3077; Sc. V. Jam.
and Brockett’s North country words, v. _Brewis_; also Nares. Sc.
_brose_.

Brune, _adj. pl._ S. brown, 2181, 2249.

Bulder, _adj._ or _n._ 1790. In the north a _Boother_ or _Boulder_, is a
hard flinty stone, rounded like a bowl. Brockett’s Gl. So also in Grose,
_Boulder_, a large round stone. _Bowlders_, Marsh. Midl. Count. Gl. The
word has a common origin with Isl. _ballaðr_, Fr. _boulet_, Sc. _boule_,
in Doug. V. Jam.

Bunden. _See_ Binden.

Burgeys, _n._ S. burgess, 1328. _Burgeis_, 2466, _pl._ 2012. _Burgmen_,
2049. _Burhmen_, _Borhmen_, Laȝamon., V. Spelm. in v. _Burgarii_.

Burwe. _See_ Berwen.

Burwes. _See_ Boru.

But, Bute, _conj._ S. except, unless, 85, 690, 1149, 1159, 2022, 2031,
2727. _But on_, 535, 962, except. _Butand_, Sc. _But yf_, 2972, unless.
[It should be noted that _but on_ should properly be _one_ word, being
the A.S. _búton_ or _bútan_, except. But it is written as two words in
the MS.]

But, _n._ 1040. Probably the same as _Put_, q.v. The word _Bout_ is
derived from the same source.

But, _part. pa._ contended, struggled with each other (_or perhaps_
struck, thrust, pushed), 1916. _Buttinge_, _part. pr._ striking against
with force, 2322. From the Fr. _Bouter_, Belg. _Botten_, to impel, or
drive forward. V. Jam. Suppl. in v. _Butte_, and _Butt_ in Wedgwood.

Butte, _n._ a flounder or plaice, 759. Du. _bot_. _See_ Halliwell.

Byen. _See_ Beye.

Bynde. _See_ Binden.

Bynderes, _n. pl._ S. binders, robbers who bind, 2050.


Caliz, _n._ S. chalice, 187, 2711.

  Lunet than riche relikes toke,
  The _chalis_ and the mes boke.

    _Yw. and Gaw._ 3907.

Callen, _v._ S. to call, 747, 2899.

Cam. _See_ Komen.

Canst, _pr. t._ S. knowest, 846. _Cone_, 622, canst. _Kunne_, _pl._ 435.
V. Gl. Chauc. in v. _Conne_. Jam. and Gl. Lynds. _See_ Couthe.

Carl, _n._ S. churl, slave, villain, 1789. _Cherl_, 682, 684, 2533.
_Cherles_, _g. c._ churl’s, 1092. _Cherles_, _pl._ villains, bondsmen,
262, 620. Sir Tr. p. 39; V. Spelm. in v. _Ceorlus_, and Jam. and Gl.
Lynds.

Casten. _See_ Kesten.

Catel, _n._ Fr. chattels, goods, 225, 2023, 2515, 2906, 2939. Web. Gl.,
R. Br., P. Plowm., Chauc.

  Nowe hath Beuis the treasure wone,
  Through Arundell that wyll runne,
  Wherefore with that and other _catel_,
  He made the castle of Arundel.

    _Syr Bevys_, O. iii.

Cauenard, _n._ Fr. [_cagnard caignard_] a term of reproach, originally
derived from the Lat. _canis_, 2389. V. Roquef. Menage.

  This crokede _caynard_ sore he is adred.

    Rits. A. S. p. 36.

  Sire _olde kaynard_, is this thin aray?

    Chauc. C. T. 5817.

Cayser, Caysere, _n._ Lat. emperor, 977, 1317, 1725. _Kaysere_, 353.

Cerges, _n. pl._ Fr. wax tapers, 594. _Serges_, 2125. Chauc. Rom. R.
6251; V. Le Grand. _Vie privée des F._; V. 3, p. 175.

Chaffare, _n._ S. merchandise, 1657. R. Cœur de L. 2468, R. Gl., Sir
Ferumbras, ap. Ellis, M. R. V. 2, p. 412, Chauc., R. Hood, i. 87.
_Chaffery_, Sc. V. Lynds. Gl.

Cham for Came, 1873.

Chanbioun, _n._ Fr. champion, 1007. Sir Tr. p. 97. _Chaunpiouns_, _pl._
1015, 1031, 1055; V. Spelm. in v. _Campio_. Cf. A.S. _cempa_.

Chapmen, _n. pl._ S. merchants, 51, 1639; R. Gl., R. Br., Chauc. In Sc.
pedlars. V. Jam., and Gl. Lynds.

Charbucle, _n._ Fr. Lat. a carbuncle, 2145. _Charbocle_, Syr Bevys.
_Charbokull_, Le bone Flor. 390. _Charboucle_, Chauc. C. T. 13800.
_Charbukill_, Doug. Virg. 3, 10.

Cherl. _See_ Carl.

Chesen, _v._ S. to choose, select, 2147. Sir Tr. p. 27; K. Horn, 666;
Rits. M. R., Web., R. Br., Chauc., V. Jam. in v. _Cheis_.

Chinche, _adj._ Fr. niggardly, penurious, 1763, 2941.

  Bothe he was scars, and _chinche_.

    _The Sevyn Sages_, 1244.

So in Chauc. Rom. Rose, 5998, and Gower, _Conf. Am._ 109 b.

Chiste, _n._ S. Lat. chest, 222. _Kiste_, 2018. _Kist_, Yorksh. and Sc.;
V. Jam. and Lynds. Gl.

Citte, _pa. t._ S. cut, 942. _Kit_, Web. M. R. _Kyt_, Syr Eglam. B. iv.
_Kette_, Syr Bevys, C. iii. So Chauc. C. T. 6304.

Claddes, _pa. t. 2 p._ S. claddest, 2907.

Clapte, _pa. t._ S. struck, 1814, 1821.

Clare, _n._ Fr. spiced wine, 1728. _See_ Claret _in_ Prompt. Parv.

Clef, _pa. t._ S. cleft, 2643, 2730.

Cleue, _n._ S. dwelling, 557, 596. A.S. _cleofa_.

Cleuen, _v._ S. to cleave, cut, 917.

Clothe, Clothen, _v._ S. to clothe, 1138, 1233. In l. 1233, Garnett
suggests that _cloþen_ may be a _nom. pl._ = clothes. If so, _dele_ the
comma after it.

Clutes, _n. pl._ S. clouts, shreds of cloth, 547. _Clottys_, Huntyng of
the hare, 92. Cf. Chauc. C. T. 9827, and _Clut_ in Bosworth.

Clyueden, _pa. t. pl._ S. cleaved, fastened, 1300.

Cok, _n._ Lat. cook, 967. _Kok_, 903, 921, 2898. _Cokes_, _Kokes_,
_g. c._ cook’s, 1123, 1146.

Comen, Comes, Cometh. _See_ Komen.

Cone. _See_ Canst.

Conestable, _n._ Fr. constable, 2286. _Conestables_, _pl._ 2366.

Conseyl, _n._ Fr. counsel, 2862.

Copes. _See_ Kope.

Corporaus, _n._ Fr. Lat. the fine linen wherein the sacrament is put,
188; Cotgr. V. Du Cange, and Jam. in v. _Corperale_.

    After the relics they send;
  The _corporas_, and the mass-gear,
  On the handom [halidom?] they gun swear,
  With wordes free and hend.

    _Guy of Warw._ ap. Ellis, M. R. V. 2, p. 77.

Corune, _n._ Lat. crown, 1319, 2944.

Coruning, _n._ Lat. coronation, 2948.

Cote, _n._ S. cot, cottage, 737, 1141.

Couel, _n._ coat, garment, 768, 858, 1144. _Cuuel_, 2904. _Kouel_, 964.
The word is connected with A.S. _cufle_, _cugele_, a cowl.

Couere, _v._ Fr. to recover, 2040.

  And prayde to Marie bryght,
  _Kevere_ hym of hys care.

    _Ly Beaus Desc._ 1983.

  Hyt wolde _covyr_ me of my care.

    _Erl of Tol._ 381.

Coupe, _v._ buy, buy dearly, get in exchange, 1800. Icel. _kaupa_.

Couth. _See_ Quath.

Couþe, _pa. t._ of Conne, _v. aux._ S. knew, was able, could, 93, 112,
194, 750, 772. _Kouþen_, _pl._ 369.

  More he _couthe_ of veneri,
  Than _couthe_ Manerious.

    _Sir Tristr._ p. 24.

_See_ Canst.

Crake, Crakede. _See_ Kraken.

Crauede, _pa. t._ S. craved, asked, 633.

Crice, _n._ explained to mean _rima podicis_ in Coleridge’s Glossarial
Index, 2450. Cf. A.S. _crecca_. Icel. _kryki_, a corner. In Barb. x.
602, _crykes_ is used for _angles_, corners. _See_ Krike.

Crist, _n._ Lat. Gr. Christ, 16, &c. _Cristes_, _g. c._ 153. _Kristes_,
2797.

Croiz, _n._ Fr. Lat. cross, 1263, 1268, 1358, &c. _Croice_, Sir Tr.
p. 115.

Croud, _part. pa._ crowded, oppressed (?) 2338. K. Alisaund, 609. Cf.
A.S. _crydan_, p. p. _gecróden_.

Croun, Croune, _n._ Fr. crown, head, 568, 902, 2657. _Crune_, 1814,
2734.

  Fykenildes _crowne_
  He fel ther doune.

    _K. Horn_, 1509.

Cf. K. of Tars, 631; Le bone Flor. 92, and Erle of Tol. 72.

Cruhsse. _See_ To-cruhsse.

Crus, brisk, nimble, 1966. It is the Sw. _krus_, excitable, Sc.
_crouse_. See _Crouse_ in Atkinson’s Cleveland Glossary.

Cunnriche, _n._ S. kingdom, 2318. _Kinneriche_, 976. _Kuneriche_, 2400.
_Kunerike_, 2804. _Kunrik_, 2143. In the last instance it means _a mark
of royalty, or monarchy_. Web. _Kyngriche_, _Kynryche._

Curt, _n._ Fr. court, 1685.

Curteys, Curteyse, _adj._ Fr. courteous, 2875, 2916.

Cuuel. _See_ Couel.


Dam, _n._ 2468, here used in a reproachful sense, but apparently from
the same root as the Fr. _Dam_, _Damp_, _Dan_, and _Don_, i.e. from
_Dominus_.

Dame, _n._ Fr. Lat. mistress, lady, 558, 1717. V. Gl. Chauc.

Danshe, _n. pl._ Danish men, 2689, 2945, &c. _See_ Denshe.

Datheit, _interj._ 296, 300, 926, 1125, 1887, 1914, 2047, 2447, 2511.
_Datheyt_, 1799, 1995, 2604, 2757. An interjection or imprecation,
derived from the Fr. _Deshait_, _dehait_, _dehet_, explained by Barbazan
and Roquefort, _affliction_, _malheur_; [from the O.F. _hait_,
pleasure]. It may be considered equivalent to Cursed! Ill betide! In
the old Fabliaux it is used often in this sense:

  Fils à putain, fet-il, lechiere,
  Vo jouglerie m’est trop chiere,
  _Dehait_ qui vous i aporta,
  Par mon chief il le comparra.

    _De S. Pierre et du Jougleor_, 381.

The term was very early engrafted on the Saxon phraseology. Thus in the
_Disputation of Ane Hule and a Niȝtingale_, l. 99.

  _Dahet_ habbe that ilke best,
  That fuleth his owe nest!

It occurs also frequently in the Old English Romances. _See_ Sir Tristr.
pp. 111, 191; Horn Childe, ap. Rits. V. 3, p. 290; Amis and Amil. 1569;
Sevyn Sages, 2395; R. Brunne, where it is printed by Hearne _Dayet_. To
this word, in all probability, we are indebted for the modern
imprecation of _Dase you!_ _Dise you!_ _Dash you!_ still preserved in
many counties, and in Scotland. V. Jam. Suppl. v. _Dash you._

Dawes, _n. pl._ S. days, 27, 2344, 2950. _Dayes_, 2353.

Ded, Dede, _n._ S. death, 149, 167, 332, 1687, 2719, &c.

Ded, _part. pa._ S. dead, 2007.

Dede, _n._ S. deed, action, 1356.

Dede, Deden, Dedes. _See_ Do.

Deide. _See_ Deye.

Del, _n._ S. deal, part, 218, 818, 1070, &c. Web., R. Gl., R. Br.,
Chauc. _Deil_, Sc. V. Jam.

Deled, _part. pa._ S. distributed, 1736. _See_ To-deyle.

Demen, _v._ S. to judge, pass judgment, 2467. _Deme_, _Demen_, _pr. t.
pl._ judge, 2476, 2812. _Demden_, _pa. t. pl._ judged, 2820, 2833.
_Demd_, _part. pa._ judged, 2488, 2765, 2838.

Denshe, _adj._ Danish, 1403, 2575, 2693. _See_ Danshe.

Deplike, _adj._ S. deeply, 1417. Synonymous with _Grundlike_, q.v.

Dere, _n._ S. dearth, scarcity, 824, 841. R. GL. p. 416.

Dere, _adv._ S. dearly, 1637, 1638.

Dere, _v._ S. to harm, injure, 490, 574, 806, 2310. _Dereth_, _pr. t._
injures, 648. K. Horn, 148; R. Br. p. 107; K. of Tars, 192; Chauc.
_Deir_, Sc. Doug. Virg. 413, 52; Lynds. Gl.

Dere, _adj._ S. dear, 1637, 2170, &c.

Deuel, _n._ S. devil, 446, 496, 1188. _Deueles_, _g. c._ devil’s, 1409.

Deus. This is undoubtedly the vocative case of the Lat. _Deus_, used as
an interjection, 1312, 1650, 1930, 2096, 2114. “Its use was the same in
French as in English. Thus in King Horn:

  Euuers Deu en sun quer a fait grant clamur,
  Ohi, _Deus!_ fait il, ki es uerrai creatur,
  Par ki deuise, &c.

    _Harl._ MS. 527, f. 66 b. c. 2.

It was probably introduced into the English language by the Normans, and
its pronunciation remained the same as in the French.

  And gradde ‘as armes,’ for _Douce_ Mahons! --_K. Alisaunder_, 3674.

It is curious to remark, that we have here the evident and simple
etymology of the modern exclamation _Deuce!_ for the derivation of which
even the best and latest Lexicographers have sent us to the _Dusii_ of
St Augustine, the _Dues_ of the Gothic nations, _Diis_ of the Persians,
_Teus_ of the Armoricans, &c. Thomson very justly adds, that all these
words, ‘seem, like dæmon, to have been once used in a good sense,’ and
in fact are probably all corruptions of the same root. Cf. R. Brunne,
p. 254, and Gl. in v. _Deus_. For the first suggestion of this
derivation the Editor is indebted to Mr Will. Nicol.” --M.

Deye, _v._ S. to die, 840. _Deide_, _pa. t. pl._ died, 402.

Dide, Diden, Dides. _See_ Do.

Dike, _n._ S. ditch, 2435. _Dikes_, _pl._ 1923. N.E. and Sc., V. Jam.
and Brockett.

Dine, _n._ S. din, noise, 1860, 1868.

Dinge, _v._ S. to strike, scourge, beat, 215, 2329. _Dong_, _pa. t._
struck, 1147. _Dungen_, _part. pa._ beaten, or scourged, 227. Sc. and
N.E. _See_ Jam. Gl., Lynds., and Ray.

Dint, _n._ S. blow, stroke, 1807, 1817, 1969, &c. _Dent_, Sir Tr. p. 92;
Chauc. _Dynt_, R. Br. _Dintes_, _pl._ 1437, 1862, 2665. _Duntes_,
K. Horn, 865. _Dentys_, Rits. M. R. _Dyntes_, R. Gl. _Dintes_, Minot,
p. 23; V. Gl. Lynds.

Do, Don, _v._ S. The various uses of this verb in English and Scotch, in
an auxiliary, active, and passive sense, have been pointed out by
Tyrwhitt, Essay on Vers. of Chauc. Note (37), Chalmers, Gl. Lynds. and
Jamieson. It signifies: to do, _facere_, 117, 528, 1191; to cause,
_efficere_, 611; _do casten_, 519; _do hem fle_, 2600, to put or place
(used with _in_ or _on_), 535, 577, &c. _Dones on_ = don es on = do them
on, put them on (_see_ Es), 970. _Dos_, _pr. t. 2 p._ dost, 2390. _Dos_,
_pr. t. 3 p._ does, 1994, 2434, 2698. _Doth_, _Don_, _pr. t. pl._ do,
1838, 1840. _Doth_, _imp._ do, cause (ye), 2037. _Dos_, _imp. pl._ do
ye, 2592. _Dede_, _Dide_, _pa. t._ caused, 658, 970, &c. _Dede_, _Dide_,
_pa. t._ put, placed, 659, 709, 859. _Dedes_, _Dides_, _pa. t. 2 p._
didest, 2393, 2903. _Deden_, _Diden_, _pa. t. pl._ caused, 242; did,
performed, 953, 1176, 2306. _Don_, _part. pa._ caused, 1169. _Don_,
_part. pa._ done, 667. _Of liue haue do_, 1805, have slain.

Dom, _n._ S. doom, judgment, 2473, 2487, 2813, &c. Sir Tr. p. 127.

Dore, _n._ S. door, 1788.

Dore-tre, _n._ S. bar of the door, 1806. _See_ Tre.

Douhter, _n._ S. daughter, 120, 2712. _Douthe_, 1079. _Douther_, 2867,
2914. _Douhtres_, _pl._ 350, 2982. _Douthres_, 2979. _Doutres_, 717.

Doun. _See_ Adoun.

Doutede, _pa. t._ Fr. feared, 708.

Douthe, _n._ Fr. fear, 1331, 1377.

Douthe, _pa. t._ of Dow, _v. imp._ S. [_dugan_, valere, prodesse] was
worth, was sufficient, availed, 703, 833, 1184. It is formed in the same
manner as _Mouthe_, Might. _See_ Sir Tr. p. 77; Jam. and Gl. Lynds.
in v. Dow.

Drad. _See_ Dred.

Drawe, Drawen. _See_ Drou.

Dred, _imp._ dread, fear (thou), 2168. _Dredden_, _Dredde_, _pa. t. pl._
dreaded, feared, 2289, 2568. _Drad_, _part. pa._ afraid, 1669. _See_
Adrad.

Drede, _n._ S. dread, 1169; doubt, anxiety, care, 828, 1664. Chauc.

Dremede, _pa. t._ S. (used with _me_), dreamed, 1284, 1304.

Dreinchen, Drenchen, Drinchen, _v._ S. to drown, 553, 561, 583, 1416,
1424, &c. _Drenched_, _part. pa._ drowned, 520, 669, 1368, 1379. V. Gl.
Web., R. Gl., Chauc.

Dreng, _n._ _See_ note on l. 31.

Drepen, _v._ S. to kill, slay, 1783, 1865, &c. _Drepe_, would slay, 506.
_Drop_, _pa. t._ killed, slew, 2229. Bosworth gives _drepan_, to slay.
Cf. Sw. _dräpa_.

Dreping, _n._ slaughter, 2684. Cf. A.S. _drepe_.

Drinchen. _See_ Dreinchen.

Drinken, _v._ S. to drink, 459, 800.

Drinkes, _n. pl._ S. drinks, liquors, 1738.

Drit, _n._ [Icel. _drítr_, Du. _dreet_] dirt, 682. A term expressing the
highest contempt. K. Alisaund. 4718; Wickliffe. So, in an ancient
metrical invective against Grooms and Pages, written about 1310,

  Thah he ȝeue hem cattes _dryt_ to huere companage,
  Ȝet hym shulde arewen of the arrerage.

    MS. Harl. 2253, f. 125.

Cf. Jam. Suppl. in v. _Dryte_, and Gl. Lynds.

Driuende. _See_ Drof.

Drou, _pa. t._ S. drew, 705, 719, &c. _Vt-drow_, _pa. t._ out-drew,
2632. _With-drow_, withdrew, 498; (_spelt_ wit-drow), 502. _Drawe_,
_Drawen_, _part. pa._ drawn, 1925, 2225, 2477, 2603, &c. _Ut-drawe_,
_Ut-drawen_, out-drawn, 1802, 2631. _See_ To-Drawe.

Drof, _pa. t._ S. drove, 725; hastened, 1793, 1872. _Driuende_, _part.
pr._ driving, riding quickly, 2702.

Drurye, _n._ Fr. courtship, gallantry, 195. Web., Rits. M. R.,
P. Plowm., Chauc., Lynds.

Dubbe, _v._ Fr. S. to dub, create a knight, 2042. _Dubbede_, _pa. t._
dubbed, 2314. _Dubban to ridere_, Chron. Sax. An. 1085, [11086]. _To
cnihte hine dubben_, Laȝam. l. 22497. “Hickes, Hearne, Gl. R. Gl., and
Tyrwhitt, Gl. Chauc., all refer the word to the Saxon root, which
primarily signified _to strike_, the same as the Isl. _at dubba_. Todd
on the contrary, Gl. Illustr. Chauc., thinks this questionable, and
refers to Barbazan’s Gl. in v. _Adouber_, which is there derived from
the Lat. _adaptare_. Du Cange and Dr Merrick give it also a Latin
origin, from _Adoptare_, and by corruption _Adobare_.” --M. The
etymology is discussed in Wedgwood, s.v. _Dub._ _See_ Note on l. 2314.

Duelle, _v._ S. to dwell, give attention, 4.

  A tale told Ysoude fre,
    Thai _duelle_:
  Tristrem that herd he.

    _Sir Tristr._ p. 181.

Cf. Sir Otuel, l. 3, and Sevyn Sages, 1. _Dwellen_, to dwell, remain,
1185; to delay, 1351. _Dwellen_, _pr. t. pl._ dwell, tarry, 1058.
_Dwelleden_, _pa. t. pl._ dwelt, tarried, 1189.

Dwelling, _n._ delay, 1352

Dun. _See_ Adoun.

Dungen. _See_ Dinge.

Dunten, _pa. t. pl._ S. struck, beat, 2448.

Dursten, _pa. t. pl._ S. durst, 1866.


Eie, _n._ S. eye, 2545. _Heie_, 1152. _Eyne_, _pl._ eyes, 680, 1273,
1364; _eyen_, 1340; _eyn_, 2171.

Eir, _n._ Fr. Lat. heir, 410, 2539. _Eyr_, 110, 289, &c. Jam. gives it a
Northern etymology, in v. Ayr.

Ek, _conj._ S. [_eac_] eke, also, 1025, 1038, 1066, &c. _Ok_ [Su.-G.
_och_, Du. _ook_] 187, 200, 879, 1081, &c. V. Jam. in v. Ac.

Eld, _adj._ S. old, 546. _Helde_, 2472. _Heldeste_, sup. 1396.

Elde, _n._ S. age, 2713. _Helde_, 128, 174, 387, 1435.

  _Ælde_ hæfde heo na mare
  Buten fihtene ȝere.

    _Laȝam._ l. 25913.

R. Br. In Sc. _Eild_. It was subsequently restricted to the sense of
_old age_, as in Chauc.

Elles, _adv._ S. else, 1192, 2590.

Em, S. uncle, 1326. Sir Tr. p. 53. Properly, says Sir W. Scott, an uncle
by the father’s side. It appears however to have been used indifferently
either on the father’s or mother’s side. _See_ Hearne’s Gl. on R. Gl.
and R. Br., Web., Erle of Tol. 988; Chauc. Troil. 2, 162, and Nares.
Prov. Eng. _Eam_.

Er, _adv._ S. before, 684. _Her_, 541. _Are_, Sir Tr. p. 152. _Er_,
K. Horn, 130. _See_ Are, Or.

Er, _conj._ S. before, 317, 1261, 2680. _Her_, 229.

Erl, _n._ S. earl, 189, &c. _Erles_, _g. c._ 2898, earl’s. _Herles_,
883. _Erldom_, earldom, 2909.

Ern, _n._ S. eagle, 572. Rits. M. R. Octovian, 196; R. Gl. p. 177; Will.
of Palerne.

Erþe, _n._ S. earth, 740; ground, 2657.

Erþe, _v._ S. to dwell, 739. A.S. _eardian._

Es, a plural pronoun signifying _them_, as in _don es on_ = put them on,
970. See _Gen. and Exod._ ed. Morris, pref. p. xix.

Et, a singular pronoun, equivalent to _it_, used in _hauenet_ = _hauen
et_, 2005; _hauedet_ = _haued et_, 714.

Ete, Eten, _v._ S. to eat, 791, 800, 911, &c. _Hete_, _Heten_, 146, 317,
457, 641. _Et_, _imp._ eat (thou), 925. _Et_, _Het_, _pa. t._ ate, 653,
656. _Etes_, _fut. 2 p._ thou shalt eat, 907. _Eteth_, _fut. 3 p._ shall
eat, 672. _Eten_, _part. pa._ eaten, 657.

Eþen, _adv._ S. hence, 690. _Heþen_, 683, 845, 1085, 2727.

Eþer. _See_ Ayþer.

Euere, Eure, _adv._ S. ever. 207, 424, 704, &c. _Heuere_, 17, 327, 830.

Euereich, _adj._ S. every, 137. _Euere il_, 218, 1334, 1644. _Euere
ilc_, 1330. _Eueri_, 1070, 1176, 1383. _Eueril_, 1764, 2318, &c.
_Euerilk_, 2258, 2432. _Euerilkon_, every one, 1062, 1996, 2197. _See_
Il.

Euere-mar, _adv._ S. evermore, 1971.

Eyen, Eyn, Eyne. _See_ Eie.

Eyr. _See_ Eir.


Fader, _n._ S. Lat. father, 1224, 1403, 1416. Sir Tr. p. 35; K. Horn,
114. The cognate words may be found in Jam.

Faderles, _adj._ fatherless, 75.

Fadmede, _pa. t._ S. fathomed, embraced, 1295. From _fæthmian_, Utraque
manu extensa complecti, Cod. Exon., ed. Thorpe, p. 334. It has the same
meaning in Sc. V. Jam.

Falle, _v._ S. to fall, 39, &c. _Falles_, _imp. pl._ fall ye, 2302.
_Fel_, _pa. t._ fell, appertained. 1815, 2359. _Fellen_, _pa. t. pl._
fell, 1303.

Fals, _adj._ S. false, 2511.

Falwes, _n. pl._ S. fallows, fields, 2509. Chauc. C. T. 6238, where
Tyrwh. explains it _harrowed lands_.

Fare, _n._ S. journey, 1337, 2621. R. Gl. p. 211; R. Br., Minot, p. 2
(left unexplained by Rits.); Barb. iv. 627. _Schip-fare_, a voyage, Sir
Tr. p. 53.

Faren, _v._ S. to go, 264. _Fare_, 1378, 1392, &c. _Fare_, _pr. t. 2 p._
farest, behavest, 2705. _Fares_, _pr. t. 3 p._ goes, flies, 2690.
_Ferde_, _pa. t._ went, 447, 1678, &c.; behaved, 2411. _For_ (went),
2382, 2943. _Foren_, _pa. t. pl._ went, 2380, 2618.

Faste, _adv._ S. attentively, earnestly, 2148.

  Tristrem as a man
  _Fast_ he gan to fight.

    _Sir Tristr._ p. 167.

  Bidde we ȝeorne Ihū Crist, and seint Albon wel _faste_,
  That we moten to the Ioye come, that euere schal i-laste.

    _Vita S. Albani_, MS. Laud. 108. f. 47 b.

Fastinde, _part. pr._ S. fasting, 865.

Fauth. _See_ Fyht.

Fawen, _adj._ S. fain, glad, 2160. _Fawe_, K. of Tars, 1058; Octovian,
307; R. Gl. p. 150; Chauc. C. T. 5802.

Fe, _n._ S. fee, possessions, or money, 386, 563, 1225, &c. _See_ Jam.
and Lynds. Gl.

Feble, _adj._ Fr. feeble, poor, scanty, 323.

Feblelike, _adv._ feebly, scantily, 418. _Febli_, Sir Tr. p. 179, for
_meanly_.

Feden, _v._ S. to feed, 906. _Feddes_, _pa. t. 2 p._ feddest, 2907.

Fel. _See_ Bifalle, Falle.

Felawes, _n. pl._ S. fellows, companions, 1338.

Feld, _n._ S. field, 2634, 2685, 1291.

Felde, Felede. _pa. t._ S. felled, 67, 1859, 2694. _Felden_ (? read _he
ne fellen_, they did not fall), 2698. _Feld_, _part. pa._ felled, 1824.
Sir F. Madden writes-- “in l. 2698, I prefer reading _ne felden_, did
not fell, governed by _that_. In l. 67, Garnett suggested _felede_,
pursued, from Swed. _följade_.”

Fele, _adj._ S. many, often, 778, 1277, 1737, &c. Sir Tr. p. 19.

Fele, _adv._ S. very, 2442.

Fend, _n._ S. fiend, 506, 1411, 2229.

Fer, _adv._ S. far. 359, 1863, 2275, &c. _Ferne_, far, 1864; _pl. adj._
foreign, 2031.

  Þa kingges buh stronge,
  And of _ferrene_ lond.

    _Laȝam._ l. 5528.

Cf. Chauc. Prol. l. 14.

Ferd, _n._ S. army, 2384, 2548, &c. _Ferde_, 2535. Laȝam., R. Gl.,
R. Br., Web. _Ferdes, pl._ 2683.

Ferde. _See_ Fare.

Fere, _n._ S. companion, wife, 1214. Sir Tr. p. 157. K. Horn, Web.,
R. Gl., R. Br., Minot, Chauc. _Feir_, Sc. V. Jam. and Gl. Lynds.

Ferlike, _n._ S. wonder, 1258. _Ferlik_, 1849. Sir Tr. p. 21. Originally
in all probability an _adj._

Ferþe, _adj._ S. fourth, 1810.

Feste, _n._ Fr. feast, 2344, &c.

Feste, _v._ Fr. to feast, 2938.

Festen, _v._ S. to fasten, 1785; (used passively) 82. _Fest_, _pa. t._
fastened, 144.

Fet. _See_ Fot.

Fete, _v._ S. to fetch, bring, 642, 912, 937, &c. Used passively, 316,
2037. _Fetes_, _pr. t. s._ fetch, 2341. V. Pegge’s Anecd. of Engl. Lang.
p. 135.

Fetere, _v._ S. to fetter, chain, 2758. Used passively.

Feteres, _n. pl._ S. fetters, 82, 2759.

Fey, _n._ Fr. faith, 255, 1666. _Feyth_, 2853.

Fiht, _n._ S. fight, 2668, 2716.

Fikel, _adj._ S. fickle, inconstant, 1210, 2799.

File, _n._ vile, worthless person, 2499.

  Men seth ofte a muche _file_,
  They he serue boten a wile,
  Bicomen swithe riche.

    _Hending the hende_, MS. Digb. 86.

So in R. Br. p. 237.

  David at that while was with Edward the kyng,
  Ȝit auanced he that _file_ vntille a faire thing.

It is used for _coward_ by Minot, pp. 31, 36. Cf. Du. _vuil_, foul,
malicious.

Finden, _v._ S. to find, 1083. _Finde_, 220. _Fynde_, 42. _Funden_, _pa.
t. pl._ found, 602. _Funde_, _part. pa._ found, 2376. _Funden_, 1427.

Fir, _n._ S. fire, 585, 1162, &c. _Fyr_, 915.

Firrene, _adj._ S. made of fir, 2078. _Firron_, Doug. Virg. 47. 34.

Flaunes, _n. pl._ Fr. custards, or pancakes, 644. _See_ Way’s note in
Prompt. Parv.

Fledden, _pa. t. pl._ S. fled, 2416.

Flemen, _v._ S. to drive away, banish, 1160. R. Gl., R. Br., Chauc.,
Rits. A. S. So in Sc. V. Jam.

Flete, _pres. subj._ S. float, swim, 522. Sir Tr. p. 27; K. Horn, 159;
Chauc. _Fleit_, Sc. V. Jam.

Fleye, _v._ S. to fly, 1791, 1813, 1827, 2751. _Fley_, _pa. t._ flew,
1305.

Flo, _v._ S. to flay, 612, 2495. K. Horn, 92. _Flow_, _pa. t._ flayed,
2502. _Flowe_, _pa. t. pl._ 2433.

Flok, _n._ S. flock, troop, 24. _See_ Trome.

Flote, _n._ S. boat, 738. A.S. _flóta_, a ship; Icel. _floti_, (1) a
ship, (2) a fleet; cf. Laȝam. 4530.

Flour, _n._ Fr. flower, 2917.

Fnaste, _v._ S. to breathe, 548. Cf. A.S. _Fnæstiað_, the wind-pipe,
_Fnæstan_, puffs of wind. _Fnast_ = breath in _Owl and Nightingale_,
l. 44.

Fo, _n._ S. foe, 1363, 2849; _pl._ foos, 67.

Fol, _n._ Fr. fool, 298. _Foles_, pl. 2100.

Folc, Folk, _n._ S. men collectively, people, 89, 438, &c.

Folwes, _imp._ S. follow ye, 1885, 2601.

Fonge, _v._ S. to take, receive, 763; _2 p. pres. subj._ 856. In common
use from Laȝam. to Chauc. and much later.

For, _prep._ S. _For to_ is prefixed to the inf. of verbs in the same
manner as the Fr. _pour_, or Sp. _por_. It is so used in all the old
writers, and in the vulgar translation of the Scriptures, and is still
preserved in the North of England. Cf. 17, &c. _For_ = on account of,
1670. Sir Tr. p. 62.

For, Foren. _See_ Faren.

Forbere, _v._ S. spare, abstain from, 352. Chauc. Rom. R. 4751.
_Forbar_, _pa. t._ spared, abstained from, 764, 2623.

Forfaren, _v._ S. to perish, 1380. R. Br. _Forfard_ (_p. p._) Ly Beaus
Desc. 1484. The inf. is also used in Web., P. Plowm., Chauc. In Sc.
_Forfair_. V. Compl. of Scotl. p. 100, and Gl. Lynds.

Forgat, _pa. t._ S. forgot, 2636, &c. _Foryat_, 249.

For-henge, _v._ to kill by hanging, 2724. Cf. Du. _verhangen zich_, to
hang one’s self.

Forlorn, _part. pa._ S. utterly lost, 770, 1424. _Forloren_, 580.
R. Br., Rits. M. R., Chauc. Used actively, Sir Tr. p. 35.

Forþi, _adv._ S. on this account, therefore, because, 1194, 1431, 2043,
2500, 2578. Sir Tr. p. 14, and in all the Gloss.

Forthwar, _adv._ S. forthward; i.e. as we go on, 731.

Forw, _n._ S. furrow, 1094.

Forward, _n._ S. promise, word, covenant, 486. _Forwarde_, 554. Laȝam.
l. 4790. Sir Tr. p. 13. Rits. M. R., Web., R. Gl., R. Br., Minot, Chauc.

Fostred, _part. pa._ S. nourished, 1434, 2239.

Fot, _n._ S. _Euerilk fot_, 2432, every foot, or man. _Fet_, _pl._ 616,
1022, 1303, 2479. _Fote_, 1054, 1199.

Fouhten. _See_ Fyht.

Fourtenith, _n._ S. fortnight, 2284.

Fremde, _adj._ (used as a _n._) S. stranger, 2277.

  Vor hine willeth sone uorgiete
  Tho _fremde_ and tho sibbe.

    MS. Digb. 4.

  Ther ne myhte libbe
  The _fremede_ ne the sibbe.

    _K. Horn_, 67.

See also R. Gl. p. 346; Chron. of Eng. 92; P. Plowm., Chau., Jam. and
Gl. Lynds.

Freme, _v._ S. to perform, 441.

Fri, _adj._ S. free, liberal, 1072. Chauc.

Frie, _v._ to blame, 1998. Icel. _fryja_, to blame. Cf. _freles_,
blameless. _Allit. Poems_, ed. Morris, A. 431.

Fro, _prep._ S. from, 265, &c.

Frusshe. _See_ To-frusshe.

Ful, _adv._ S. very, much, completely, 6, 82, &c. _Ful wo_, 2589, much
sorrow.

Ful, Fule, _adj._ S. foul, 506, 555, 626, 965, &c. _Foule_, 1158.

Fulike, _adv._ S. foully, shamefully, 2749.

Fulde, _part. pa._ S. filled, complete, 355.

Funde, Funden. _See_ Finde.

Fyht, _v._ S. to fight, 2361. _Fauth_, _pa. t._ fought, 1990. _Fouhten_,
_pa. t. pl._ fought, 2661.

Fyn, _n._ Fr. Lat. ending, 22. R. Br., Minot, Chauc., &c.


Ga, _v._ S. to go. _See_ Ouer-ga.

Gad, _n._ S. goad, 279. _Gaddes_, _pl._ 1016. In Gl. Ælfr. among the
instruments of husbandry occur _Gad_, stimulus, and _Gadiron_, aculeus.
So in _The Fermeror and his Docter_, printed by Laing:

  Quhen Symkin standis quhisling with ane quhip and ane _gaid_,
  Priking and ȝarkand ane auld ox hide.

    V. Jam. in v. _Gade_, 4. and Nares.

Gadred, _part. pa._ S. gathered, 2577.

Gadeling, _n._ S. an idle vagabond, low man, 1121.

  Þa wes æuer alc cheorl
  Al swa bald alse an eorl,
  & alle þa _gadelinges_
  Alse heo weoren sunen kinges.

    _Laȝam._ l. 12333.

Cf. K. Alisaund. 1733, 4063. _Gadlyng_, Rob. of Cicyle, MS. Harl. 1701.
R. Gl. p. 277, 310. Chauc. Rom. Rose, 938. The word originally meant
_Vir generosus_. _See_ Beowulf, l. 5227.

Gaf. _See_ Yeue.

Galwe-tre, _n._ S. the gallows, 43, 335, 695. Le Bone Fl. 1726. Erle of
Tol. 657. _Galues_, _Galwes_, _Galewes_, 687, 1161, 2477, 2508. R. Br.,
Chauc. Cf. Ihre Gl. Suiog. in v. _galge_, ab Isl. _gayl_, ramus arboris.

Gamen, _n._ S. game, sport, 980, 1716, 2135, 2250, 2577; joy, 2935,
2963. _Gamyn_, Barb. iii. 465. V. Jam.

Gan, _pa. t._ S. began, 2443. V. Jam.

Gangen, _v._ S. to go, walk, 370, 845, &c. _Gange_, 796. _Gongen_, 855.
_Gonge_, 1185, 1739, &c. _Gonge_, _pr. t. 2 p._ goest, 690, 843.
_Gangande_, _part. pr._ on foot, walking, 2283. Wynt. V. Jam.

Garte, _pa. t._ S. made, 189, 1857, &c. _Gart_, 1001, 1082. _Gert_, Sir
Tr. p. 147. V. Jam. and Gl. Lynds.

Gat, Gaten. _See_ Geten.

Gate, _n._ S. (1) way, road, 846, 889. Sir Tr. p. 27; (2) manner,
fashion (_see_ þus-gate), 783, 2419, 2586.

Genge, _n._ S. family, company, 786, 1735; retinue, 2353, 2362, 2383.

  þe king of þan londe
  Mid muchelere _genge_.

    _Laȝam._ l. 6156.

Hence _Gang_. V. Todd’s Johns.

Gent, _adj._ Fr. neat, pretty, 2139. Sir Tr. p. 87, R. Br., Chauc.

Gere. _See_ Messe-gere.

Gest, _n._ Fr. tale, adventure, 2984. _See_ Note in Warton’s Hist. E.
P., V. I. p. 69. Ed. 1840.

Gete, _v._ to guard, watch, keep, 2762, 2960. Icel. _gæta_, to guard.
Cf. _Ormulum_, 2079. [Suggested by Garnett.]

Geten, _v._ S. to get, take, 792. _Gete_, 1393. _Gat_, _pa. t._ begot,
got, 495, 730. _Gaten_, _Geten_, _pa. t. pl._ begot, 2893, 2934, 2978.
_Getes_, _f. t. 2 p._ shalt get, 908.

Ghod _for_ Good, 255.

Gisarm, _n._ Fr. a bill, 2553. _See_ Gl. Rits. M. R., Spelm. in v., Jam.
Dict., and Merrick’s Gl. in v. _Gesa_, _Gesum_. [“Distinguished from
other weapons of the axe kind by a spike rising from the back. There
were two kinds, viz. the _glaive-gisarme_, with a sabre-blade and spike;
and the _bill-gisarme_, in shape of a hedging-bill with a spike.”
Godwin’s Archæol. Handbook, p. 254.]

Giue. _See_ Yeue.

Giue, _n._ S. gift, 2880. _Gyue_, 357. _Yeft_, 2336.

Giueled, piled up, 814. [The O.Fr. _gavelé_ means piled up, heaped
together. To _gavel_ corn (_see_ Halliwell) is to put it into heaps,
and a _gavel_ is a heap of corn. But this may very well be derived from
_gable_, since a heap takes the shape of a peaked end of a house; and
the O.Fr. term is probably originally Teutonic, and connected, as
_gable_ is, with Mœso-Goth. _gibla_, a pinnacle, with which compare
German _giebel_, Du. _gevel_, and hence our word would be taken from a
verb _givelen_, to pile up. The fish in Havelok’s basket would be what
the Dutch call _gevelvormig_, or formed like a gable, or like
the peaked end of a _stack_ of hay or corn, whence the author’s
expression--_giueled als a stac_, piled up in the shape of a stack.
Other explanations are _flayed_, from Du. _villen_, to flay; or _filed_,
ranged in rows upon a stick, where _stick_ is represented by _stac_. But
the latter supposition would require the reading _on_ rather than _als_;
not to mention the fact that if fish are carried _in a pannier_ they
would not resemble fish carried _on a stick_. Nor is it quite
satisfactory to say that _giueled_ is put for _gefilled_, filled; for
this is not elucidated by the expression _als a stac_, any more than the
explanation _flayed_ is. _Gable_ is Icel. _gafl_, Sw. _gafvel_, Dan.
_gavl_, Du. _gevel_, Ger. _giebel_, _gipfel_, &c. Its forked shape seems
to give rise to Ger. _gabel_, Sw. _gaffel_, a fork; respecting which set
of words see _Gaff_ in Wedgwood.]

Gladlike, _adv._ S. gladly, 805, 906, 1760.

Glede, _n._ S. a burning coal, 91, 869. Rits. M. R., Web., R. Br.,
Chauc. _See_ Note on l. 91.

Gleiue, Gleyue, Fr. a spear, lance, 1770, 1844, 1981. _Gleiues_,
_Gleyues_, _pl._ 267, 1748, 1864. Dr Merrick explains it, “A weapon
composed of a long cutting blade at the end of a staff.” See R. Gl.
p. 203; Guy of Warw. R. iii.; Chauc. Court of Love, 544; Percy, A. R.

Glem, _n._ S. gleam, ray, 2122. _See_ Stem.

Gleu, _n._ S. game, skill, 2332. Properly, says Sir W. Scott, the joyous
science of the minstrels. Cf. Sir Tr. p. 24, 35, 150.

Gleymen, _n. pl._ S. gleemen, 2329. _Glewemen_, Sir Tr. p. 110.

  Whar bin thi _glewmen_ that schuld thi _glewe_,
  With harp and fithel, and tabour bete.

    _Disp. betw. the bodi & saul_, ap. Leyd. Compl. of Scotl.

Glotuns, _n. pl._ Fr. gluttons, wicked men, 2104.

  Va, _Glutun_, envers tei nostre lei se defent.

    _K. Horn_, 1633, MS. Douce.

Cf. K. Horn, 1124, ap. Rits., Yw. and Gaw. 3247; R. Cœur de L. 5953, and
Chauc.

Gnede, _adj._ S. niggardly, frugal, 97. Nearly equivalent to _chinche_,
l. 1763. Printed _guede_ in Sir Tr. p. 169. [Cf. _Gnede_ in Halliwell,
and A.S. _gneadlícnes_, frugality.]

God, _n._ S. gain, wealth, goods, 797, 2034; _pl._ gode, 1221. R. Gl.,
R. Br., Chauc.

God, Gode, _adj._ S. good, excellent, 7, &c.

Goddot, Goddoth, _interj._ god wot! 606, 642, 796, 909, 1656, 2543; cf.
2527. It is formed probably in the same manner as _Goddil_, for God’s
will, in Yorksh. and Lanc. V. Craven dialect, and View of Lanc. dialect,
1770, 8vo. The word before us appears to have been limited to
Lincolnshire or Lancashire, and does not appear in the Glossaries. Other
instances are in the _Cursor Mundi_, MS. Cott. Vesp. F. iii. fol. 87_b_,
and in MS. Cott. Galba E. ix. fol. 61. It also occurs in a translation
of a French Fabliau, written in the reign of Edw. I.

  _Goddot!_ so I wille,
  And loke that thou hire tille,
  And strek out hire thes.

    _La fablel & la cointise de dame Siriz_, MS. Digb. 86.

Grundtvig told me (adds Sir F. Madden) that it is “undoubtedly the same
interjection spelled _Ioduth_ in the old Danish rime-chronicle.”

Gome, _n._ S. man, 7.

Gon, _v._ S. to go, walk, 113, 1045. _Goth_, _imp._ go ye, 1780. _Gon_,
_part. pa._ gone, 2692.

Gonge, Gongen. _See_ Gange.

Gore, 2497. _See_ Grim.

Gos, _n._ S. goose, 1240. _Gees_, _pl._ 702.

Gouen. _See_ Yeue.

Goulen, _pr. t. pl. 2 p._ S. howl, cry, 454. _Gouleden_, _pa. t. pl._
howled, cried, 164.

  An _yollen_ mote thu so heye,
  That ut berste bo thin ey.

    _Hule and Nihtingale_, l. 970.

Used also by Wickliffe. In Scotland and the North it is still preserved,
but in the South _Yell_ is used as an equivalent. _See_ Jam. and Gl.
Lynds.

Gram, _n._ S. grief, 2469.

Graten, _v._ S. [_grǽtan_] to weep, cry, cry out, 329. _Grede_, 96.
_Grete_, _pres. pl._ 454, 2703. _Gret_, _pa. t._ cried out, wept, 615,
1129, 2159. _Gredde_, 2417. _Greten_, _pa. t. pl._ wept, 164, 415, 2796.
_Grotinde_, _part. pr._ weeping, 1390. _Graten_, _part. pa._ wept, 241.
_Igroten_, 285. _See_ Jam. and Gl. Lynds.

Graue, _v._ S. to bury, 613. _Grauen_, _part. pa._ buried, 2528. Web.,
Sir Guy, Ii. iv., Chauc.

Greme, _v._ S. to irritate, grieve, 442. In R. Br. _Gram_ is used as a
verb, in the same sense.

Grene, _n._ desire, lust, 996. It is simply the Mœso-Goth. _gairuni_,
lust; Icel. _girni_, desire. V. Jam. in v. Grene. Halliwell suggests
_sport_, _play_, to which it is _opposed_.

Gres, _n._ S. grass, 2698.

Gret, _adj._ S. great, heavy, loud, 807, 1860. _Greth_, 1025; _pl._
grete, 1437, 1862. _Grettere_, _comp._ greater, 1893.

Grete. _See_ Graten.

Greþede, 2003. Explained as _greeted_, _accosted_, by Sir F. Madden; but
the use of þ (not th) renders this doubtful. May it not signify
_treated_, _handled_ (lit. _arrayed_), from the _vb._ greyþe?

Grethet. _See_ Greyþe.

Greting, _n._ S. weeping, 166.

Grette, _pa. t._ S. accosted, greeted, 452, 1811, 2625. _Gret_, _part.
pa._ accosted, greeted, 2290.

Greu, _pa. t._ S. grew, prospered, 2333; _pl._ grewe, 2975.

Greue, _v._ S. to grieve, 2953.

Greyþe, _v._ S. [gerǽdian] to prepare, 1762. _Greyþede_, _pa. t._
prepared, 706. _Greyþed_, _part. pa._ prepared, made ready, 714.
_Grethet_, 2615. Laȝam. l. 4414. Sir Tr. p. 33. Sc. _Graith_. V. Jam.
and Gl. Lynds.

Greyue, _n._ S. [_geréfa_] greave, magistrate, 1771. _Greyues_, _g. c._
greave’s, 1749. _Greyues_, _pl._ 266. V. Spelm. in v. _Grafio_, and
Hickes, Diss. Epist. p. 21, n. p. 151.

Grim, _adj._ S. cruel, savage, fierce, 155, 680, 2398, 2655, 2761.
R. Br., Rits. M. R. _See_ Beowulf, l. 204.

Grim, _n._ [smut, dirt, 2497. The explanation is that Godard, on being
flayed, did not bear his sentence as one of rank and blood would have
done, but began to roar out as if he were mere _dirt_ or _mud_, i.e. one
of the dregs of the common herd. This curious expression is ascertained
to have the meaning here assigned to it by observing (1) that _grim_ and
_gore_ must be substantives, and (2) that they must be of like
signification; but chiefly by comparing the line with others similar to
it. Now the context, in the couplet following, repeats that “men might
hear him roar, that _foul vile_ wretch, a mile off;” and in l. 682,
Godard calls Grim “_a foul dirt_, a thrall, and a churl.” The author
clearly uses _dirt_ and _churl_ as synonyms. The word _grim_ is the
Danish _grim_, soot, lampblack, smut, dirt, answering to the English
_grime_; see _grime_ in Atkinson’s Glossary of the Cleveland dialect.
_Gore_ is the A.S. _gór_, wet mud, or clotted blood, in the latter of
which senses it is still used. See “_Gore. Limus_” in Prompt. Parv., and
Way’s note.]

Grip, _n._ griffin, 572. Web. _Graip_, Sc., V. Jam. The plural _gripes_
is in Laȝam. l. 28062, and K. Alisaund. 4880. Swed. _grip_.

Grip, _n._ S. [_græp_] ditch, trench, 2102. _Gripes_, _pl._ 1924. V.
Jam. in v. _Grape_; and Skinner, v. _Groop_. Cf. Swed. _grop_.

Gripen, _pr. t. pl._ S. gripe, grasp, 1790. _Gripeth_, _imp._ gripe ye,
1882. _Grop_, _pa. t._ grasped, 1776, 1871, 1890, &c.

Grith, _n._ S. peace, 61, 511. _Grith-sergeans_, 267, legal officers to
preserve the peace. These must not be confounded with the _Justitiarii
Pacis_ established in the beginning of Edw. III. reign, and called
_Gardiani Pacis_. V. Spelm. in v. Cf. Icel. _grið_.

Grom, _n._ male child, youth, 790; young man, 2472. Belgic _grom_ has
the same sense of _boy_. Cf. Icel. _gromr_, homuncio. So in _Sir
Degore_, A. iv.

  He lyft up the shete anone
  And loked upon the lytle _grome._

It generally elsewhere signifies _lad_, _page_.

Gronge, _n._ Fr. grange, 764. [Halliwell says that, in _Lincolnshire_, a
lone farm-house is still called a _grange_. In old English it is
sometimes spelt _graunge_, which comes near the form here used. Cf. Fr.
_grange_; Ital. _grangia_ (Florio), a country-farm.]

Grop. _See_ Gripen.

Grotes, _n. pl._ S. [_grót_] small pieces, grit, dust, 472, 1414.

Grotinde. _See_ Graten.

Grund, _adj. used as adv._ 1027. _See_ Grundlike.

Grunde, _n._ S. _dat. c._ ground, 1979, 2675.

Grunden, _part. pa._ S. ground, 2503. Yw. and Gaw. 676. _Grounden_,
Chauc.

Grundlike, _adv._ heartily, 651, 2659; deeply, 2013, 2268, 2307, where
it is equivalent to _Deplike_, q.v. The word is undoubtedly Saxon, but
in the Lexicons we only find _Grundlinga_, funditus, from Ælf. Gl. It is
used by Laȝamon, l. 9783.

  Cnihtes heom gereden
  _Grundliche_ feire.

Gyue. _See_ Giue.


Hal, all, 2370. [_Hal_, more probably, is shortened from _half_, like
_twel_ from _twelue_.]

Halde, _v._ S. to hold, take part, 2308. _Holden_, to keep or observe,
29, 1171. _Haldes_, _pr. t. 3 p._ holds, 1382. _Hel_, _pa. t._ held,
109. _Helden_, _pa. t. pl._ held, 1201. _Halden_, _part. pa._ held,
holden, 2806.

Hals, _n._ S. neck, 521, 670, 2510. Sir Tr. p. 109.

Halue, _n._ S. side, part; _bi bothe halue_, 2682. _See_ Bi-halue.

Haluendel, _n._ S. the half part, 460. R. Gl. p. 5; R. Br.; K. Alisaund.
7116; Emare, 444; Chron. of Engl. 515; R. Hood, i. 68.

Handlen, _v._ S. to handle, 347. _Handel_, 586.

Hangen, _v._ S. to hang, 335, 695. _Hengen_, 43, &c. _Honge_, 2807.
_Henged_, _part. pa._ hung, 1922, 2480. Cf. For-henge.

Harum _for_ Harm, 1983, 2408.

Hasard, _n._ Fr. game at dice, 2326. _See_ Note on l. 2320.

Hatede, _pa. t._ S. hated, 1188.

Hauen, _v._ S. to have, 78, &c. _Hawe_, 1188. _Haue_, 1298. _Haues_,
_Hauest_, _pr. t. 2 p._ hast, 688, 848. _Haues_, _Haueth_, _pr. t. 3 p._
haveth, hath, has, 1266, 1285, 1952, 1980, &c. _Hauet_, hath, 564.
_Hauen_, _pr. t. pl._ have, 1227. _Hauenet_, have it, 2005. _Hauede_,
_pa. t._ had, 649, 775, &c. _Hauedet_, 714, had it. _Haueden_, _pa. t.
pl._ had, 238, &c. _Aueden_, 163. _Haue_, _Hauede_, _Haueden_, _subj._
would have, 1428, 1643, 1687, 2020, 2675.

Haui _for_ Haue I, 2002.

He, _pron._ S. Is often understood, as in ll. 869, 1428, 1777, and hence
might perhaps have been designedly omitted in ll. 135, 860, 1089, 2311,
though the metre seems to require _he_ in 135 and 1089. _He_, _pl._
they, 54, &c.

Heie, _n._ _See_ Eie.

Heie, _adj._ S. tall, 987. _Hey_, 1071, 1083; high, 1289. _Heye se_,
719. _Heye curt_, 1685. _Heye and lowe_, 2431, 2471, &c.

Hel, Helden. _See_ Halde.

Helde, Heldeste. _See_ Eld.

Helen, _v._ S. [_hǽlan_] to heal, 1836. _Hele_, 2058. _Holed_, _part.
pa._ healed, 2039.

Helm, _n._ S. helmet, 379, 624, 1653, &c. _Helmes_, _pl._ 2612.

Helpen, _v._ S. to help, 1712. _Helpes_, _imp. pl._ help ye, 2595.
_Holpen_, _part. pa._ helped, 901.

Hem, _pron._ S. them, 367, &c.

Hend. _See_ Hond.

Hende _for_ Ende, 247.

Hende, _n._ S. a duck, 1241. A.S. _ened_; Lat. _anas_ (_anat-is_); Du.
_eend_; Icel. _önd_. “Ende mete, for dookelyngys, _Lenticula_;” and
again, “Ende, dooke byrde, _Anas_.” Prompt. Parv.

Hende, _adj._ courteous, gentle, 1104, 1421, 1704, 2793, 2877, 2914;
skilful, 2628. It certainly is the same word with _hendi_, _hendy_.
_See_ Tyrwh. on C. T. 3199; Gl. R. Glouc.; Amis and Amil. 1393; Ly Beaus
Desc. 333; Morte Arthur, ap. Ellis, M. R. V. I. p. 359, &c.; Dan. and
Sw. _händig_, dexterous.

Hende, _adv._ S. near, handy, 359, 2275. Web.

Hendeleik, _n._ courtesy, 2793. Cf. _Allit. Poems_, ed. Morris, B. 860.

Henged, Hengen. _See_ Hangen.

Henne, _adv._ S. hence, 843, 1780, 1799. In the same manner is formed
_Whenne_, K. Horn, 169, which Ritson thought a mistake for _whence_.

Henne, _n_, S. hen, 1240. _Hennes_, _pl._ 702.

Her. _See_ Er.

Her, _adv._ S. here, 689, 1058, &c. _Her offe_, 2585, hereof.

Her, _n._ S. hair, 1924. _Hor_, 235.

Herboru, _n._ S. habitation, harbour, lodging, 742. _Herberowe_, Web.;
_Herbegerie_, R. Br.; _Harbroughe_, Sq. of Lowe Degre, 179; _Herberwe_,
Chauc.; _Herbry_, Wynt.; _Herberye_, Lynds. Gl. q.v. and Jam.

Herborwed, _pa. t._ S. lodged, 742. Laȝam., Chauc., V. Jam. in v.
_Herbery_.

Here, _pron._ S. their, 52, 465, &c.

Here, _n._ S. army, 346, 379, 2153, 2942. R. Br., K. Alisaund, 2101.

Here, Heren, _v._ S. to hear, 4, 732, 1640, 2279, &c. _Y-here_, 11.
_Herd_, _Herde_, _pa. t._ heard, 286, 465, &c. _Herden_, _pa. t. pl._
150.

Herinne, _adv._ S. herein, 458.

Herkne, _imp. s._ S. hearken, 1285. _Herknet_, _imp. pl._ hearken ye, 1.

Herles. _See_ Erl.

Hernes, _n._ Fr. armour, harness, 1917. R. Br., &c.

Hernes, _n. pl._ S. brains, 1808.

Hern-panne, _n._ S. skull, 1991. Yw. and Gaw. 660; R. Cœur de L., 5293.
_Hardynpan_, Compl. of Scotl. p. 241; V. Gl.

Hert, _n._ S. hart, deer, 1872.

Herte, _n._ S. heart, 479, 2054, &c. _Herte blod_, 1819. Laȝam.
l. 15846; Sir Tr. p. 98; Chauc.

Hertelike, _adv._ S. heartily, 1347, 2748.

Het, _part._ S. hight, named, 2348. _Hoten_, _part. pa._ called, named,
106, 284.

Het, Hete, Heten. _See_ Ete.

Hetelike, _adv._ S. hotly, furiously, 2655.

  And Guy hent his sword in hand,
  And _hetelich_ smot to Colbrand.

    _Guy of Warw._ ap. Ellis, M. R. V. 2, p. 82.

In Sir Tr. p. 172, _Hethelich_ is explained _Haughtily_ by the Editor,
and by Jam. _reproachfully_. Cf. _Hetterly_ in Gloss. to _Will. of
Palerne_.

Hethede, _pa. t._ commanded, 551. A.S. _hetan_. The _th_ is here
pronounced like _t_, as elsewhere.

Heþen. _See_ Eþen.

Heu, _n._ S. hue, colour, complexion, 2918. Very common. We may hence
explain the “inexplicable phrase” complained of by Mr Ellis, Spec. E. E.
P. V. I. p. 109. “On _heu_ her hair is fair enough” --occasioned by
Ritson having inadvertently copied it _hen_, from the MS.; _see_ Anc.
Songs, p. 25.

Heued, _n._ S. head, 624, 1653, 1701, 1759, &c. _Heuedes_, _pl._ 1907.

Heuere. _See_ Euere.

Heui, _adj._ S. heavy, 808; laborious, 2456.

Hew, _pa. t._ S. cut, 2729. Sir Tr. p. 20.

Hext, _adj. sup._ S. highest, tallest, 1080. _Haxt_, Laȝamon; _Hext_,
K. Alisaund. 7961; R. Gl.; Chauc.

Hey, Heye. _See_ Heie.

Heye, _adv._ S. on high, 43, 335, 695, &c.

Heylike, _adv._ S. highly, honourably, 2319. _Heyelike_, 1329.

Heyman, _n._ S. nobleman, 1260. Sir Tr. p. 82. _Heymen_, _Heyemen_,
_pl._ 231, 958.

Hi, Hic. _See_ Ich.

Hider, _adv._ S. hither, 868, 885, 1431.

Hides, _n. pl._ S. hides, skins, 918.

Hijs, _pron._ S. his, 47, 468. _Hise_, 34, &c. _Hyse_, 355. [The final
_e_ is most used with _plural_ nouns.]

Hile, _v._ S. [_hélan_] to cover, hide, 2082. _Hele_, Sir Tr. p. 19,
Web., Rits. M. R., Chauc. _Hilles_, Yw. and Gaw. 741. V. Jam. in v.
_Heild._ --Somersetsh.

Him, _pron._ S. them, 257, 1169.

Hine, _n. pl._ S. hinds, bondsmen, 620. Web. _Hinen_, R. Gl., V. Jam.
in v.

Hinne. _See_ Þer-inne.

Hire, _pron._ S. her, 127, &c. _Hire semes_, it beseems her, 2916.

His _for_ Is, 279, 1973, 2692.

Hise. _See_ Hijs.

Hof _for_ Of, 1976.

Hof, _pa. t._ S. heaved, 2750.

Hok, _n._ S. hook, 1102.

Hol, _adj._ whole, well, 2075.

Holi, _adj._ S. holy, 1361. [_Printed_ hoh _in the former edition_.]

Hold, _adj._ S. firm, faithful, 2781, 2816.

  Ant suore othes _holde_,
  That huere non ne sholde
  Horn never bytreye.

    _K. Horn_, 1259.

Cf. R. Glouc. p. 377, 383, 443; K. Alisaund. 2912; Chron. of Engl. 730.

Hold, Holde, _adj._ S. old, 30, 192, 417, 956, &c.; former, 2460.

Holden. _See_ Halde.

Hole, _n._ S. socket of the eye, 1813.

Holed. _See_ Helen.

Holpen. _See_ Helpen.

Hond, _n._ S. hand, 2446. _Hon_, 1342. _Dat. c._ hend, 505, 2069; _pl._
hondes, 215, 636. _Hond-dede_, _n._ S. handiwork, 92.

Honge. _See_ Hangen.

Hor. _See_ Her, _n._

Hore, _n._ mercy, 153. _See_ Ore.

Horn, _n._ S. 779. [This probably refers to the _shape_ of the simnel.
Halliwell says, a Simnel is “generally made in a _three-cornered_ form.”
Cracknels are still made with pointed and turned up ends, not unlike
_horns_.]

Hors, _n._ S. horse, 2283. _Horse-knaue_, groom, 1019. So in a curious
satirical poem, temp. Edw. II.

  Of rybaudz y ryme,
  Ant rede o my rolle,
  Of gedelynges, gromes,
  Of Colyn, & of Colle;
  Harlotes, _hors knaues_,
  Bi pate & by polle.

    MS. Harl. 2253, f. 124 b.

Used also by Gower, Conf. Am. _See_ Todd’s Illustr. p. 279.

Hosen, _n. pl._ S. hose, stockings, 860, 969. In Sir Tr. p. 94, trowsers
seem to be indicated.

Hoslen, _v._ S. to administer or receive the sacrament, 212. _Hoslon_,
362. _Hosled_, _part. pa._ 364. _Hoseled_, 2598. Le Bone Flor. 776.
Chauc.

Hoten. _See_ Het.

Houes, _pr. t._ S. behoves, 582. [_Read_ bi-houes?]

Hul, _n._ S. hollow, i.e. vale, 2687. A.S. _hole_. Cf. l. 2439.

Hund, _n._ S. hound, 1994, 2435. _Hundes_, _pl._ 2331.

Hungred _for_ Hunger, 2454.

Hungreth, _pr. t._ hunger, 455. _Hungrede_, _pa. t._ hungered, 654.

Hure, _pron._ S. our, 338, 842, 1231, &c.

Hus _for_ Us, 1217, 1409.

Hus, _n._ S. house, 740. _Huse_, 2913. _Hws_, 1141. _Milne-hous_,
mill-house, 1967.

Hyl, _n._ S. heap, 892. _Hil_, hill, 1287.

Hw, W, _adv._ S. how, 120, 288, 827, 960, 1646, &c. _Hwou_, 2411, 2946,
2987, &c.

Hwan, _adv._ S. when, 408, 474, &c. _See_ Quan.

Hware, _adv._ S. where, 1881, 2240, 2579. _Hwar-of_, whereof, 2976.
_Hwere_, 549, 1083.

Hwat, _pron._ S. what, 596, 635, 1137, 2547. _Wat_, 117, 541, &c. _Wat
is yw_, 453. _Hwat_ or _Wat is þe_, 1951, 2704.

Hwat. _See_ Quath.

Hwel, _n._ S. whale, or grampus, 755. _Hwæl_, balena, vel cete, vel
cetus. Ælf. Gl. _See_ Qual.

Hweþer, _adv._ S. whether, 294, 2098.

Hwi, _adv._ S. why, 454. _See_ Qui.

Hwil, _adv._ S. whilst, 301, 363, 538, 2437.

Hwile, _n._ S. time, 722, 1830.

Hwil-gat, _adv._ S. how, lit. which way, 838. _Howgates_, Skinner.

Hwit, _adj._ S. white, 1729.

Hwo, _pron._ S. who, 296, 300, 368, 2604, &c. _See_ Wo.

Hwor, _adv._ S. whether, 1119. _Hwore-so_, wheresoever, 1349.

Hwou. _See_ Hw.

Hws. _See_ Hus.

Hyse. _See_ Hijs.


Ich, _pron._ S. I, 167, &c. _Ihc_, 1377. _Hic_, 305. _Hi_, 487. _I_,
686. _Y_, 15, &c.

Id _for_ It, 2424.

I-gret, 163. _See_ Grette.

I-groten. _See_ Graten.

Il, _adj._ S. each, every, 818, 1740, 2112, 2483, 2514. _Ilc_, 1056,
1921. _Ilke_, 821, 1861, 2959, 2996; (= same), 1088, 1215, 2674, &c.
_Ilker_, each (of them), 2352. _Ilkan_, each one, 1770, 2357. _Ilkon_,
1842, 2108. _See_ Eueri.

Ille, _adv._ S. _Likede hire swithe ille_, 1165, it displeased her much.
Sir Tr. p. 78. A common phrase. _Ille maked_, ill treated, 1952.

I-maked. _See_ Maken.

Inne, _adv._ S. in, 762, 807. _See_ Þerinne.

Inow, _adv._ S. enough, 706, 911, 931, &c. _Ynow_, 563, 1795. _Ynou_,
904.

Intil, _prep._ S. into, 128, 251, &c. _See_ Til.

Ioie, _n._ Fr. joy, 1209, 1237, 1278, &c. _Ioye_, 1315.

Ioyinge, _n._ gladness, 2087.

Ioupe, _n._ Fr. a doublet, 1767. Roquefort gives the form _Jupe_, but
_Jupon_ or _Gipoun_ is more usual. See _Jupon_ in Halliwell, and _Gipe_
in Roquefort.

Is _for_ His, 735, 2254, 2479.

Iuele, _n._ S. evil, injury, 50, 1689. _Yuel_, 2221. _Yuele_, 994.
_Iuel_, sickness, 114. _Yuel_, 144, 155.

  þa þe he wes ald mon,
  þa com him _ufel_ on.

    _Laȝam._ l. 19282.

_Ful iuele o-bone_, very lean, 2505; cf. 2525.

Iuele, _adv._ S. evilly, 2755. _Me yuele like_, displease me, 132. Cf.
Ille liken.


Kam. _See_ Komen.

Kaske, _adj._ strong, vigorous, 1841. Sw. _karsk_.

Kaym, _n. p._ Cain, 2045. _See_ note in loc.

Kayn, _n._ 31, 1327. Evidently a provincial pronunciation of _Thayn_,
which in the MS. may elsewhere be read either _chayn_ or _thayn_. By the
same mutation of letters _make_ has been converted into _mate_, _cake_
into _cate_, _wayke_ into _wayte_, _lake_ into _late_ (R. Hood, i. 106),
&c., or _vice versâ_. _See_ Thayn.

Kaysere. _See_ Cayser.

Keft, _part. pa._ purchased, 2005. _Sure keft_ = sourly (bitterly)
purchased it. _See_ Sure _and_ Coupe.

Keling, _n._ 757, cod of a large size, Jam. q.v. The _kelyng_ appears in
the first, course of Archb. Nevil’s Feast, 6 Edw. IV. _See_ Warner’s
_Antiq. Cul._ Cotgrave explains _Merlus_, A Melwall or _Keeling_, a kind
of small cod, whereof stockfish is made.

Keme. _See_ Komen.

Kempe, _n._ S. knight, champion, 1036. V. Jam. in v.

Kene, _adj._ S. keen, bold, eager, 1832, 2115. A term of very extensive
use in old Engl. and Sc. poetry, and the usual epithet of a knight.

Kesten, _v._ S. to cast in prison, or to overthrow, 81, 1785 (used
passively). _Casten_, cast, throw, 2101. _Keste_, _pa. t._ cast, 2449.
_Keste_, _part. pa._ cast, placed, 2611; [or it may be the infin. mood.]

Keuel, _n._ S. a gag, 547. See _Kevel_ in Hall., _Kewl_ in. Jam. A.S.
_cæfli_, a halter, headstall.

Kid, _part. pa._ S. made known, discovered, 1060. Sir Tr. p. 150;
R. Br.; Yw. and Gaw. 530; Minot, p. 4; Chauc. From _cýþan_, notum
facere.

Kin, Kyn, _n._ S. kindred, 393, 414, 2045.

Kines, _n._ S. _gen. c._ kind, 861, 1140, 2691. _None kines_ = of no
kind; _neuere kines_ = of never a kind.

Kinneriche. _See_ Cunnriche.

Kippe, _v._ S. [_cépan_] to take up hastily, 894. _Kipt_, _Kipte_, _pa.
t._ snatched up, 1050, 2407, 2638.

  Horn in is armes hire _kepte._

    _K. Horn_, 1208.

  _Kypte_ heore longe knyues, and slowe faste to gronde.

    _Rob. Glouc._ p. 125.

_Kept up_, snatcht up, Gl. R. Br. Jamieson derives the word from Su.-G.
_kippa_, to take anything violently. V. in v. _Kip._ Ihre quotes the
Icel. _kipti up_ = snatched up.

Kirke, _n._ S. church, 1132, 1355. _Kirkes_, _pl._ 2583. V. Gl. Lynds.
and Jam.

Kiste. _See_ Chiste.

Kiste, _pa. t. s._ kissed, 1279. _Kisten_, _pa. t. pl._ S. kissed, 2162.

Kiwing, _n._ 1736. [Respecting this word I can only record my conviction
that it is not safe to quote it, as the MS. is indistinct. I read the
word as _kilþing_, which I believe to be merely miswritten for _ilk
þing_ (which the scribe also spells _il þing_), and I suppose the sense
of the line to be-- “when they had there distributed _everything_.”]

Knaue, _n._ S. lad, 308, 409, 450, &c. Attendant, servant, 458. _Cokes
knaue_, scullion, 1123.

  Heore cokes & heore _cnaues_
  Alle heo duden of lif dæȝen.

    _Laȝam._ l. 13717.

V. Jam. in v. Gl. Lynds. and Gl. Todd’s Illustr. Chauc.

Knawe, _v._ S. to know, 2785. _Knawe_, _pr. t. pl._ know, 2207. _Kneu_,
_pa. t._ knew, 2468. _Knawed_, _part. pa._ known, 2057.

Knicth, Knith, _n._ S. knight, 77, 343, &c. _Knictes_, _pl._ 239.
_Knithes_, 1068. _Knihtes_, 2706.

Kok, _n._ a cook, 873, 180, 891, 903, 921, 2898. _See_ Cok.

Komen, _v._ S. to come, 1001. _Comes_, _Cometh_, _imp, pl._ come ye,
1798, 1885, 2247. _Kam_, _pa. t._ came, 766, 863. _Kom_, 1309. _Cam_,
2622. _Komen_, _pa. t, pl._ came, 1012, 1202. _Comen_, 2790. _Keme_,
1208. _Comen_, _part. pa._ come, 1714.

Kope, _n._ Lat. cope, 429. _Copes_, _pl._ 1957.

Koren, _n._ S. corn, 1879.

Kouel. _See_ Couel.

Kouþen. _See_ Couþe.

Kradel-barnes, _n. pl._ S. children in the cradle, 1912.

Kraken, _v._ S. to crack, break, 914. _Krake_, 1857. _Crake_, 1908.
_Crakede_, _pa. t._ cracked, broke, 568. _Kraked_, _part. pa._ 1238.

Krike, _n._ S. creek, 708.

Kunne. _See_ Canst.

Kuneriche, Kunerike, Kunrik. _See_ Cunnriche.

Kyne-merk, _n._ S. mark or sign of royalty, 604. In the same manner are
compounded _cine-helm_, _cine-stol_, &c.

  & Cador þe kene
  scal beren þas _kinges marke_;
  hæbben haȝe þene drake,
  biforen þissere duȝeðe.

    _Laȝam._ l. 19098.

  Thyll ther was of her body
  A fayr chyld borne, and a godele,
  Hadde a dowbyll _kynges marke_.

    _Emare_, 502.


Lac, _n._ S. fault, reproach, 191, 2219. Yw. and Gaw. 264, 1133. _Lak_,
R. Br., Rom. of Merlin, ap. Ellis, M. R. V. i. p. 252. Sir Orpheo,
421. _Lakke_, P. Plowm. Chauc. So in Sc. V. Jam. and Gl. Lynds. v.
_Lak_, _Lack_.

Ladde, _n._ S. lad, 1786. _Ladden_, _pl._ 1038. _Laddes_, 1015, &c. A
term subsequently applied to persons of low condition. “When _laddes_
weddeth leuedis--” Prophecy of Tho. of Essedoune, MS. Harl. 2253,
f. 127.

Large, _adj._ Fr. Lat. liberal, bountiful, 97, 2941. R. Gl. Yw. and Gaw.
865. Sir Orpheo, 27. Sevyn Sages, 1251. Chauc.

Late, _v._ S. [_lǽtan_] _pres. subj._ let, suffer, 486. _Late_, _pr. t._
let, permit, 1741. _Late_, _imp._ let, suffer, 17, 1376, 2422. _Leth_,
_pa. t._ let, suffered, 2651; caused, 252. _Late_, _part. pa._ or _inf._
put, 2611.

Laten, _v._ S. [_lǽtan_] to leave, 328. _Late be_, _imp._ leave,
relinquish, 1265; _inf._ 1657. _Let_, _pa. t._ left, 2062. _Laten_,
_part. pa._ left, abated, 240, 1925.

Lath, _n._ S. injury, 76. _Lathe_, 2718, 2976.

Lauhwinde, _part. pr._ S. laughing, 946.

Laute, _pa. t_. S. [_læccan, læhte_] received, took, 744. _Lauthe_,
1673. _Lauth_, _part. pa._ received, taken, 1988. _I-lahte_, Laȝam.
l. 29260.

  Horn in herte _laȝte_
  Al þat he him taȝte.

    _K. Horn_ (ed. Lumby), 243.

_Laght_, Yw. and Gaw. 2025. _Laught_, K. Alisaund. 685, 1109. _Lauht_,
R. Br. (_See_ Hearne’s blundering Gl. in voc.) Rits. A. S. p. 46.
_Laucht_, Wall. ix. 1964.

Laumprei, _n._ S. lamprey, 771. _Laumprees_, _pl._ 897.

Lawe, Lowe, _adj._ S. low, 2431, 2471, 2767, &c.

Lax, n. S. [læx] salmon, 754, 1727. _Laxes_, _pl._ 896. V. Spelm. and
Somn. in v. Jamieson says, it was “formerly the only name by which this
fish was known.” Cf. Dan. Sw. Icel. _lax_.

Layke, _v._ S. [_lácan_] to play, 1011. _Leyke_, _Leyken_, 469, 950,
997. _Leykeden_, _pa. t. pl._ played, 954. In the same sense the verb is
found in P. Plowman, and Sevyn Sages, 1212. So in Sc. and N.E. V. Jam.
v. _Laik_, Ray, Brockett, and Crav. Dial. v. _Lake_.

Leche, _n._ S. physician, 1836, 2057.

Led, a caldron, kettle, 924. Chauc. Prol. 202.

Lede, Leden, _v._ S. to lead, 245, &c; _utlede_, 89. Cf. 346, 379.
_Ledes_, _pr. t. 3 p._ uses, carries, 2573. _Ledde_, _pa. t._ led, 1686.
_Ledden_, _pa. t. pl._ led, 2451.

Lef, _adj._ S. agreeable, willing, _lef and loth_, 261, 440, 2273, 2313,
2379, 2775. A very usual phrase. _See_ Beowulf, l. 1026. Chauc. C. T.
1839. R. Hood, i. 41. _Leue_, 431, 909. Sir Tr. p. 187. K. Horn, 949,
&c. _Leuere_, _comp._ more agreeable, rather, 1193, 1423, 1671, &c.
_Lef_, used as adv. willingly, in the phrase “Ye! lef, ye!” = yes,
willingly, yes, 2606; cf. l. 1888.

Leidest. _See_ Leyn.

Leite, _adj._ S. light, 2441.

Leme, _n._ S. limb, 2555. _Lime_, 1409. _Limes_, pl. 86.

Leman, _n._ S. mistress, lover, 1191. _Lemman_, 1283, 1312, 1322. Used
by all the old writers, and applied equally to either sex.

Lende, _v._ S. to land, 733. Sir Tr. p. 13. R. Br. _See_ Jam. in v.
_Leind_.

Lene, _v._ S. [_leanian_] to lend, grant, 2072.

  I sal _lene_ the her mi ring.

    _Yw. and Gaw._ 737.

Lenge, _n._ the fish called _ling_, 832. [_Asellus longus_, or
_Islandicus_, Ray.] It was a common dish formerly. Thus we have _Lynge
in jelly_, in Archb. Nevil’s Feast, 6 Edw. IV., and _Lyng in foyle_, in
Warham’s Feast, 1504. _See_ Pegge’s _Form of Cury_, p. 177, 184, and MS.
Sloane, 1986.

Lenge, _v._ S. to prolong, 1734, 2363. P. Plowm.

Leoun, _n._ Lat. lion, 573. _Leun_, 1867.

Lepe, _v._ S. escape from (?) 2009. _Loupe_, to leap, 1801. _Lep_, _pa.
t._ leapt, 891, 1777, 1942. _Lopen_, _pa. t. pl._ 1896, 2616.

Lere, Leren, _v._ S. to learn, 797, 823; to teach, 2592. _Y-lere_, 12.

Lese, v. S. _imp. s. 3 p._ loose, 333. Sir Tr. p. 110.

Leth. _See_ Late.

Lette, _v._ S. [_lǽtan_, _lettan_] to hinder, retard, 1164, 2253, 2819;
to stop, cease, 2445, 2627. _Let_, _pa. t._ stopped, stayed, 2447, 2500.
_Leten_, _pa. t. pl._ stopped, delayed, 2379.

Leue, _n._ S. leave, 1387, 1626, 2952, &c.

Leue, _adj._ _See_ Lef.

Leue, _v._ S. [_lýfan_] _imp. s._ grant, 334, 406, 2807. K. Horn, 465,
MS.; R. Gl., Erle of Tol. 365. Guy of Warw. ap. Ellis, M. R. V. 2,
p. 77, where it is misprinted _lene_. It is very frequently used in the
old Engl. Metrical Lives of the Saints, MS. Laud, 108. [The true
distinction between _leue_ and _lene_ is, that the former is the A.S.
_lýfan_, G. _erlauben_ = grant in the sense of _allow_, _permit_, and is
invariably intransitive; whilst _lene_ is the A.S. _lænan_, G. _leihen_
= grant in the sense of _give_. The confusion between the senses of
_grant_ has led to confusion between _lene_ and _leue_, and in at least
five passages of Chaucer (C. T. 7226, 13613; Tro. ii. 1212, iii. 56,
v. 1749, ed. Tyrwhitt) many editions wrongly have _lene_. In the last
three instances Tyrwhitt rightly prints _leve_, but unnecessarily
corrects himself in his Glossary. I regret to add that I have thrice
made a similar mistake. In Piers Plowman, A. v. 263, and in Pierce the
Ploughman’s Crede, ll. 366 and 573, for _lene_ read _leue_. Halliwell’s
remark, that “the [former] editor of Havelok absurdly prints _leue_” is
founded upon the same misconception, and he is wrong in his censure.
_See_ the use of _lefe_ in the Ormulum, ed. White.]

Leued, _pa. t._ S. left, 225.

Leuedi, _n._ S. lady, 171, &c. _Leuedyes_, _pl._ 239. V. Hickes, Diss.
Ep. p. 52, n.

Leuere. _See_ Lef.

Leues, _pr. t. 3 p._ S. believes, 1781, 2105. From _lefan_.

Leuin, _n._ S. lightning, 2690. R. Br. p. 174. Yw. and Gaw. Chauc. C. T.
5858. Doug. Virg. 200, 53.

Lewe, _adj._ S. warm, 498, 2921.

  A opened wes his breoste,
  þa blod com forð _luke._

    _Laȝam._ l. 27556.

Leyd, Leyde. _See_ Leyn.

Leye, _n._ S. lie, falsehood, 2117.

Leve, _v._ S. to lie, speak false, 2010.

Leyke, Leyken. _See_ Layke.

Leyk, _n._ S. game, 1021, 2326. So in Beowulf, l. 2084, _sweorda-gelác_,
and Sir Tr. p. 118, _love-laike_. In the pl. _laykes_, Minot, p. 10. In
Lanc. a player is still called a _laker_.

Leyn, _v._ S. to lay, 718. _Leyde_, _pa. t._ laid, 50, 994, &c.;
stopped, 229. _Leidest_, _pa. t. 2 p._ laidest, 636. _Leyden_, _pa. t.
pl._ laid, 1907. _Leyd_, _part. pa._ laid, 1689, 1722, 2839.

Lich, _adj._ like, 2155.

Lict, Lith, _n._ S. light, 534, 576, 588, &c.

Lift, _adj._ S. left (_lævus_), 2130.

Ligge, Liggen, _v._ S. to lie down, 802, 876, 882, 1374. _See_ Lyen.

Lime, Limes. _See_ Leme.

Lite, _adj._ S. little, 276, 1730. _Litel_, 1858, &c. _Litle_, 2014.

Lith. _See_ Lict.

Lith, _imp._ S. light (thou), 585.

Lith, _adv._ S. lightly, 1942.

Lith, _n._ S. alleviation, comfort, peace, 1338. _Lyþe_, 147. It also
occurs as a sb. in Laȝam. l. 5213. As an adj. it occurs in Laȝam.
l. 7242. Sir Tr. p. 43, 82. R. Cœur de L. 2480, and Emare, 348, from the
v. _líðian_, alleviare. Cf. Icel. _lið_, sometimes used to mean _help_.
See _Leathe_ in Atkinson’s Cleveland Glossary.

Lith, _n._ S. 2515. This word is explained by Ritson _plains_, by Hearne
_tenements_, and by Jamieson a _ridge_ or _ascent_. Its real
signification seems unknown, but may be conjectured from the following
passages.

  No asked he lond no _lithe_.

    _Sir Tristr._ p. 101.

  Ther wille not be went, ne lete ther lond ne _lith_.

    _R. Brunne_, p. 194.

where it answers to the Fr. Ne volent lesser tere ne _tenement_.

  Who schall us now geve londes or _lythe_.

    _Le Bone Flor._ 841.

  Here I gif Schir Galeron, quod Gaynour, withouten ony gile,
  Al the londis and the _lithis_ fro laver to layre.

    _Sir Gaw. and Sir Gal._ ii. 27.

[_See_ Glossary to _William of Palerne_, s.v. _Lud._]

Lithes, _n. pl._ S. the extreme points of the toes, or articulations,
2163. _Fingres lith_, extremum digiti, Luc. 16, 24.

Liþes, _imp. pl._ S. listen, 1400, 2204. _Lyþes_, 2576. The verb in the
Sax. is _hlystan_, but in Su.-G. _lyda_, and Isl. _hlyda_, which
approaches nearer to the form in the poem. So also in K. Horn, 2, _wilen
lithe_, MS.; R. Br. p. 93; R. Hood, i. p. 2; Minot, p. 1. Still used in
Sc. and N.E. V. Jam. and Brockett.

Littene, _part. pa._ [or _inf._?] 2701. “_Qu._ cut in pieces, from the
same root as to _lith_, divide the joints. V. Jam. Suppl.” --M. [Or it
may mean disgraced, wounded, defeated. Cf. Su.-Goth. _lyta_, to wound;
Icel. _lyta_, to disgrace; Sw. _lyte_, a defect, _litt_, deformed; Dan.
_lyde_, a blemish.]

Liue, _n._ S. _dat. c._ life, 232; _brouth of liue_, dead, 513, 2129.
K. Horn, 188. _Of liue do_, kill, 1805. _Liues_, _gen. c. as adv._
alive, 509, 1003, 1307, 1919, 2854. _See_ On-liue.

Liuen, _v._ S. to live, 355. _Liuede_, _Liueden_, _pa. t. pl._ lived,
1299, 2044.

Lof, _n._ S. loaf, 653.

Loke, Loken, _v._ S. to look after, take care of, to behold, 376, 2136.
_Lokes_, _pr. t. 2 p._ lookest, 2726. _Loke_, _imp._ look, 1680, 1712.
_Lokes_, _imp. pl._ look ye, 2240, 2292, 2300, 2579, 2812. _Lokede_,
_pa. t._ looked, 679, 1041.

Loken, Lokene, _part. pa._ S. fastened, locked, closed, 429, 1957. So in
the Const. Othonis, Tit. _de habitu Clericorum_; “In mensura decenti
habeant vestes, et _cappis clausis_ utuntur in sacris ordinibus
constituti.” V. Spelm. in v. _Cappa clausa_. So also in the _Ancren
Riwle_, fol. 17-- “gif he haues a wid hod and a _lokin_ cape, &c.” [The
reference to the Ancren Riwle is to MS. Titus D 18, fol. 17; cf. the
edition by Morton (Camd. Soc. 1853), p. 56.]

Lond, Londe, _n._ S. land, 64, 721, &c. _Lon_, 340.

Long, _adj._ S. tall, 987, 1063. So K. Horn, 100.

Longes, _pr. t. 3 p._ S. belongs, 396. R. Br., Chauc., &c.

Lopen. _See_ Lepe.

Loth, _adj._ S. loath, unwilling, 261, 440, &c. _See_ Lef.

Louede, _pa. t._ S. loved, 71. _Loueden_, _pa. t. pl._ 955.

Louerd, _n._ S. lord, master, 96, 483, &c. _Lowerd_, 621.

Louerdinges, _n. pl._ S. lordings, masters, 515, 1401. _See_ Note in
Warton’s Hist. Engl. Poet. V. I. p. 19. Ed. 1840.

Loupe. _See_ Lepe.

Low, _pa. t._ S. laughed, 903. K. Horn, 1502. _Lowen_, _pa. t. pl._
1056.

Lowe, _n._ S. [_hlæw_] hill, 1291, 1699. Rits. M. R., Web., &c. V. Jam.
and Brockett’s Gl. v. _Lawe_.

Luue, _n._ S. love, 195. [_Luue-drurye_ seems here to be a compound
word, meaning _love-courtship_. _Lufe-drowrie_ also = love-token,
_Lyndesay’s Sq. Meldrum_, 1003. _See_ Drurye.]

Lyen, _v._ S. to lie (in bed), 2134. _Leyen_, _pt. pl._ lay, 475.

Lyþe. _See_ Lith.


Maght, Mait. _See_ Mowe.

Make, _n._ S. mate, companion, wife, 1150. K. Horn, 1427. K. Alisaund.
3314. Le Bone Flor. 881. Chauc. Sc. _Maik._ V. Jam.

Maken, _v._ S. to make, 29, &c. _Make_, 676. _Makeden_, _pa. t. pl._
made, 554. _I-maked_, _part. pa._ made, 5.

Male, _n._ Fr. a budget, bag, wallet, 48. Laȝamon, l. 3543. Web.,
Chauc., R. Hood.

Malisun, _n._ Fr. malediction, curse, 426. Sir Tr. p. 179.

Manred, Manrede, _n._ S. homage, fealty, 484, 2172, 2180, 2248, 2265,
2312, 2774, 2816, 2847, 2850. Leg. of S. Gregori, ap. Leyd. Compl. of
Scotl. _See_ Jam. for further examples.

Marz, _n._ Lat. March, 2559.

Maugre, Fr. in spite of, 1128, 1789. _See_ Tyrwh. Gl. to Chauc. and Jam.
in v.

Maydnes, _n. pl._ S. maidens, 467, 2222.

Mayster, _n._ Fr. master, 1135; chief, 2028, 2385.

Mayt, Mayth. _See_ Mowe.

Mede, _n._ S. reward, 102, 685, 1635, 2402.

Mele, _n._ S. oat-meal, 780.

Mele, _v._ Fr. to contend in battle, 2059. Gaw. and Gol. ii. 18.
_Mellay_, Wynt. viii. 15, 19. V. Jam.

Meme, 2201, _probably miswritten for_ neme; _see_ Nime.

Men (used with a sing. vb. like the Fr. _on_), men, people, 390, 647,
2610.

Mene, _v._ S. to mean, signify, 2114. _Menes_, _pr. t. 3 p._ means, 597.

Menie, _n._ Fr. family, 827. _Meynie_, 834. This word is to be found
from the time of Laȝamon to Shakespeare. Jamieson attempts to derive it
from the North. V. in v. _Menzie_. See _maisnie_ in Roquefort.

Mere, _n._ S. mare, 2449, 2478, 2504.

Messe, _n._ Fr. Lat. the service of the mass, 243, 1176. _Messe-bok_,
mass-book, 186, 391, 2710. _Messe-gere_, all the apparel, &c.,
pertaining to the service of the mass, 188, 389, 1078, 2217.

Mest, _adj. sup._ S. greatest, 233. _Moste_, 1287; tallest, 983.

Mester, _n._ Fr. trade, 823. K. Horn (ed. Lumby), 229.

Met, _pp._ S. dreamt, 1285.

Mete, _n._ S. meat, 459, &c. _Metes_, _pl._ 1733.

Meynie. _See_ Menie.

Michel, _adj._ S. much, 510, 660. _Mik_, 2342. _Mike_, 960 (cf. Horn
Childe, ap. Rits. V. 3, 292), 1744, 1761, 2336. _Mikel_, 122, 478, &c.

Micte, Micten, Micthe, Mithe, Mithest, Mithen. _See_ Mowe.

Micth, _n._ S. might, power, 35.

Middelerd, _n._ S. the earth, world, 2244. _Middelærd_, Laȝam., Rits.,
Web., R. Gl., Minot, &c. So in Sc. V. Jam.

Mik, Mike, Mikel. _See_ Michel.

Milce, _n._ S. [_mildse_] mercy, 1361. A! me do þine _milce_, Laȝam.
l. 4681; R. Gl. It is usually coupled with _ore_.

Milne-hous. _See_ Hus.

Mirke, _adj._ S. dark, 404. R. Br., Lynds.; _merke_, Chauc. Still used
in Sc. and N.E. V. Jam.

Misdede, _pa. t._ S. did amiss, 337; injured, 992, 1371. _Misdo_, _part.
pa._ misdone, offended, 2798.

Misferde, _pa. t._ S. behaved, or proceeded ill, 1869. _See_ Faren.

Misgos, _pr. t. 2 p._ S. goest or behavest amiss, 2707.

Misseyd, _part. pa._ S. spoken to reproachfully, 1688.

Mithe, Mythe, _v._ S. [_miðan_] to conceal, hide, dissemble, 652, 948,
1278. Sche might no lenger _mithe_. Horn Childe, ap. Rits. M. R. V. 3,
p. 310.

Mixed, _adj._ vile, base, 2533. From S. _myx_, fimus. Cf. _Mix_ in
_William of Palerne_.

Mo, _adj. comp._ S. more, 1742, 1846.

Mod, _n._ S. mood, humour, 1703.

Moder, _n._ S. mother, 974, 1388, &c.

Mone, _n._ S. moon, 373, 403.

Mone, _n._ S. mind, say, opinion, 816. Cf. A.S. _myne_, _monian_,
_monung_; Icel. _munr_. Hence, to _mone_, to _relate_, R. Cœur de L.
4636, and to _animadvert_, in Barbour. It appears to express the Fr.
phrase _par le mien escient_, K. Horn, 467, MS. Douce. In nearly the
same sense _mone_ may be found in K. Alisaund. 1281, R. Gl. pp. 281,
293. Cf. ll. 1711, 1972.

Mone, _v. pl._ [Isl. _mun_] must, 840. _Maun_, Sc. _Mun_, Yorksh. Cumb.
V. Jam.

Morwen, _n._ S. morning, 811, 1131, 2669, &c. _To-morwen_, 530, 810.
_Amorwe_, Sir Tr., K. Horn.

Moste. _See_ Mest.

Mote, _v._ S. may, 19, 406, 1743, 2545. _Moten_, _pl._ 18.

Moun. _See_ Mowe.

Mowe, _v._ S. _pres. sing._ may, be able, 175, 394, 675. _Mowen_, _pl._
11. _Moun_, 460, 2587. _Mait_, _pr. t. 2 p._ mayest, 689. _Mayt_, 845,
852, 1219. _Mayth_, 641. _Maght_, _pa. t. 2 p. s._ mightest, 1348.
_Mithe_, _Mithest_, 855, 1218. _Micte_, _Micthe_, _Mithe_, _pa. t. 3 p._
might, 42, 233, 1030, 1080. _Mouchte_, _Moucte_, _Moucthe_, _Mouthe_,
_Mowcte_, 145, 356, 376, &c. _Micte_, _Micten_, _Mithen_, _pl._ 232,
516, 1929, 2017. _Mouhte_, _Mouthe_, _Mouthen_, 1183, 2019, 2039, 2328,
2330, &c. V. Pegge’s Anecd. of Engl. Lang. p. iii.


Na, _adv._ S. no, 2363, 2530.

Nam. _See_ Nime.

Nayles, _n. pl._ S. nails, 2163.

Ne, _adv._ S. nor, 44, &c.

Nede, _n._ S. need, necessity, 9, &c. _Nedes_, _pl._ 1092.

Neme. _See_ Nime.

Ner, _adv._ S. near, 990, 1949.

Nese, _n._ S. nose, 2450.

Nesh, _adj._ S. [_nesc_] soft, tender, 2743. _Neys_, 217. Web., Rits.
M. R., Rob. Br., Chauc. Still used in N.W. part of England.

Neth, _n._ S. net, 752, 808, 1026; _pl._ _netes_, 783.

Neth, _n._ S. neat, cattle, 700, 1222. _Netes_, _g. c._ neat’s, 781.

Neþeles, _conj._ S. nevertheless, 1108, 1658.

Neue, _n._ S. fist, 2405. _Neues_, _pl._ 1917. V. Jam.

Neure, _adv._ S. not, never, 80, 672; _neuere a polk_, ne’er a pool,
2685. _Neuere kines_, of no kind, 2691.

Ney. _adv._ nigh, near to, nearly, 464, 640, 2619.

Neys. _See_ Nesh.

Neyþer, Neþe, _pron._ S. neither, not either, 458, 764, 2970, &c.
_Noþer_, 2623. _Noyþer_, 2697.

Newhen, _v._ S. [_nehwan_] to approach, 1866. In the more recent form to
_neigh_ it is used in several of the old Romances, Chauc., and Minot.

Nicht, Nicth, _n._ S. night, 533, 575. _Niht_, 2669. _Nith_, 404, 1247,
1754. _Nithes_, _g. c._ of night, 2100. _Nihtes_, _nithes_, _pl._ 2353;
_nihtes_, 2999.

Nime, _v._ S. _pr. s._ take, _or_ go, 1931. _Nim_, _imp._ take, 1336.
_Nam_, _pa. t._ took, 900; went, 2930. _Neme_, _pl._ went, 1207; cf.
l. 2201. _Nomen_, took, 2790. _Nomen_, _Numen_, _part. pa._ taken, 2265,
2581. _Nimes_, _imp. pl._ go ye, 2594; _nime_, go we, 2600. In the first
sense this verb is common in all the Glossaries, but in the latter sense
_To go_ it occurs nowhere but in the Gl. to Rob. Brunne, who, from being
a Lincolnshire man, approaches nearer to the language of the present
poem than any other writer. [In N.E. to _nim_ is to walk with quick,
short steps.]

Nis, _for_ Ne is, is not, 462, 1998, 2244.

Nither-tale, _n._ S. night-time, 2025. _See_ Chaucer, Prol. l. 97.

Noblelike, _adv._ S. nobly, 2640.

Nok, _n._ [Belg. _nock_] nook, corner, 820; _nouth a ferthinges nok_,
not the value of a farthing. The same phr. is in the _Manuel des Pechés_
of Rob. of Brunne, MS. Harl. 1701, fol. 39.

Nomen. _See_ Nime.

Non, _adj._ S. no, 518, 685, 1019; no one, 934, 974.

Note, _n._ S. a nut, 419. _Nouthe_, 1332.

Noþer. _See_ Neyþer.

Nou, _adv._ S. now, 328, 1362, &c. _Nu_, 2421, 2460, 2650, &c.

Nout, Nouth, Nouht, _n._ or _adv._ S. not, naught, nothing, not at all,
249, 505, 566, 648, 1733, 2051, 2822. _Nowt_, _Nowth_, 770, 2168, 2737.

Nouthe. _See_ Note.

Noyþer. _See_ Neyþer.

Nu. _See_ Nou.

Numen. _See_ Nime.

Nytte. _v._ S. make use of, require for use, 941. A.S. _nyttian_,
_neotan_, G. _nützen_, Du. _nutten_.


O. _See_ On.

Of, _prep._ S. off, 130, 216, 603, 857, 1850, 2444, 2626, 2676, 2751,
&c. _Of londe_, out of the land, 2599. Sir Tr.

Offe, _prep._ S. of, 435. _Of_, 436.

Offrende, Dan. Fr. offering, 1386.

Ofte, _adv._ S. often, 226, &c.

Ok. _See_ Ek.

On, _adj._ S. one, 425, 1800, 2028, 2263, &c.

On, _in_ But on. _See_ But.

On, _prep._ S. in, on. _On liue_, 281, 363, 694, 793 &c. _O liue_, 2865.
_On two_, 471, 1823, 2730, in two; _a two_, 1413, 2643. _O londe_, 763,
on, _or_ in land. _On knes_, 1211, 1302, 2710, on knees; _o knes_, 2252,
2796. _On brenne_, 1239, in flame, on fire. _O nith_, 1251, in the
night. _On nithes_, 2048. _O worde_, 1349, in the world (_see_ Werd).
_O mani wise_, 1713, in many a manner. _On gamen_, 1716, in sport. _On
lesse hwile_, 1830, in less time. _O bok_, 2307, 2311, on the book. _Wel
o bon_, 2355, 2525, 2571, strong of body. _Iuele o bone_, 2505, lean.
_On hunting_, 2382. _O stede_, 2549, on steed. _Up-o the dogges_, 2596,
on the dogs. From these examples, added to those which occur in every
Glossary, it is evident the Sax. prep. _On_ was subsequently corrupted
to _O_ and _A._ _See_ Tyrwh. and Jam. _A nycht_ in Barb. xix. 657,
explained by the latter _one_ night, is according to the above rule _In
the night_, as confirmed by l. 1251. Sir Tr. pp. 47, 114. R. Glouc.

One, _adj._ S. alone, singly, 815, 936, 1153, 1710, 1742, 1973, 2433.

  There hue wonede al _one._

    _K. Horn_, 80.

_See_ Tyrwh. Gl., Chauc. v. _On_.

Ones, _adv._ S. once, 1295.

Onfrest, _v._ delay, 1337. From Su.-G. _fresta_, to delay, A.S.
_firstan_, from Su.-Goth. _frest_ or _frist_, A.S. _fyrst_, a space of
time. Cf. Dan. and Sw. _first_, a truce. _Frest_, delay, Barb. vii. 447.

Onlepi. _See_ Anilepi.

Onne, _prep._ S. on, 347, 1940.

Onon, _adv._ S. anon, speedily, 136, 447, 1964, 2790.

Ontil, _prep._ S. unto, for, 761.

Or, _adv._ S. previously, before, 728, 1043, 1356, 1688, &c. _Or outh
longe_, 1789, before any long time.

Ore, _n._ S. favour, grace, mercy, 153, 211, 2443, 2797. Ich hadde of
hire milse an _ore_. Hule and Nihtingale, l. 1081. Sir Tr. p. 24.
K. Horn (ed. Lumby), 1509. _See_ Tyrwhitt’s Note on Chauc. C. T. 3724,
and Ritson’s Note, Metr. Rom. V. iii. p. 263. A.S. _ár_.

Ore, _n._ S. oar, 718, 1871, &c. _Ores_, _pl._ 711.

Osed _for_ Hosed, 971.

Oth, _n._ S. oath, 2009, 2272, &c. _Oþes_, _pl._ 2013, 2231, &c.

Oþe _for_ Oþer, 861, 1986, 2970.

Oþer, _conj._ S. either, or, 94, 674, 787, &c. _See_ Ayther.

Oþer, _adj._ S. [_alter_] the other of two, second, 879. _þe oþer day_,
1755, the following day.

  Day hit is igon & _oþer_,
  Wiþute sail & roþer.

    _K. Horn_, ed. Lumby, 187.

So also R. Br. p. 169, and Wynt.

Oþer, _adj._ S. [_alius_] other, 2490. _Oþre_, _pl._ others, 1784, 2413,
2416.

Ouer-fare, _v._ S. to pass over, cease, 2063. _See_ Fare.

Ouer-go, _v._ S. to be disregarded, 2220.

Ouer-gange, _v._ S. to get the superiority over, 2587.

Ouer-þwert, _adv._ S. across, 2822. _Ouerthuert_, R. Br. p. 241.
_Overtwert_, Ly Beaus Desc. 1017. _Overthwarte_, Syr Eglamore, B. iii.
Chauc. C. T. 1993.

Oune, _adj._ S. own, 375, 2428.

Oure, _n._ bank, shore, 321. G. _ufer_. A.S. _ófer_. Cf. “to þan castle
of Deoure on þere sæ _oure_.” _Laȝamon_, l. 31117.

Outh, _n._ S. [_awiht_] any space of time, aught, 1189; cf. l. 1789;
anything, 703. [_Outh douthe_ = was worth anything, was of any value.]


Palefrey, _n._ Fr. saddle-horse, 2060. _See_ Gl. on Chauc. in v. Pegge’s
Anec. Engl. Lang. p. 289.

Pappes, _n. pl._ Lat. breasts, 2132.

Parred, _part. pa._ confined, fastened in, barred in, 2439. We have met
with this word only in one instance, where Ritson leaves it unexplained.

  Yn al this [tyme] was sir Ywayn
  Ful straitly _parred_ with mekil payn.

    _Yw. and Gaw._ 3227.

[It is undoubtedly equivalent to O.E. _sperre_, or _spere_. Halliwell,
s.v. _Parred_, quotes “ȝe are _parred_ in . . . ȝe are so _spered_ in.”
So, too, the Ital. _sbarra_ is the Fr. _barre_. Cf. A.S. _sparran_, O.N.
_sperra_, Sc. _spar_. Hence the derivation of _park_, O.E. _parrock_, an
enclosure.]

Pastees, _n. pl._ Fr. pasties, patés, 644.

  Ther beth bowris and halles,
  Al of _pasteiis_ beth the walles.

    _Land of Cokaygne_, MS. Harl. 913, f. 5.

Pateyn, _n._ Lat. the Plate used in the service of the Mass, 187.

Paþe, _n._ S. path, road, 2381, 2390. _Paþes_, _pl._ 268.

Patriark, _n._ Lat. patriarch, 428.

Payed, _part. pa._ Fr. satisfied, content, 184. Rits. M. R., Web.,
R. Gl., R. Br. _Apaied_, Chauc.

Pelle, _v._ drive forth (_intr._), hurry forth, 810. Deriv. uncertain,
unless it be connected with Lat. _pello_, Eng. _impel._ Cf. Eng. _pelt_.

Peni, _n._ S. penny, 705, 2147. _Penies_, _pl._ 776, 1172.

Per, _n._ Fr. peer, equal, 989, 2241, 2792.

Pike, _v._ to pitch (used passively), 707. Teut. _pecken_, Lat.
_picare_. The verb in Saxon is not extant, but only the n. _pic_.

Pine, _n._ S. pain, grief, 405, 540, 1374. Sir Tr. p. 12. V. Jam.

Pine, _v._ S. to grieve, 1958.

Plat. _See_ Plette.

Plattinde, _part. pr._ tramping along, moving noisily _or_ hurriedly,
2282. From the beating noise of the feet, like Sc. _platch_ (q.v. in
Jam.). _See_ Plette.

Plawe, _v._ S. to play, 950. _Pleye_, 951.

Playces, _n. pl._ plaice, 896.

Pleinte, _n._ Fr. complaint, 134. _Pleynte_, 2961.

Plette, _v._ S. [_plæettian_] to strike, 2444. _Plat_, _pa. t._ struck,
2755. _Plette_, 2626; _pl. plette_, hurried, moved noisily, 2613. [Cf.
_Plattinde_, and note the double use of Sc. _skelp_, to beat, to hurry,
and O.E. _strike_, to beat, to move along.]

Plith, _n._ S. [_pliht_] harm, 1370, 2002. Laȝam. l. 3897.

Poke, _n._ S. a bag, 555, 769. _Pokes_, _pl._ 780.

Poles, _n. pl._ S. pools, ponds of water, 2101.

Polk, _n._ S. pool, puddle, 2685. _Pow_, Sir Tr. p. 171. _Pulk_,
Somersetsh.

Pouere, Poure, _adj._ Fr. poor, 58, 101, 2457, &c.

Pourelike, _adv._ poorly, 323.

Prangled, _part. pa._ compressed, 639. Cf. Du. _prangen_, to pinch; Dan.
_prange Seil_, to crowd sail.

Preie, _pr. t._ S. pray, 1440. _Prey_, _imp._ pray (thou), 1343.
_Preide_, _pa. t._ prayed, 209.

Prest, _n._ S. priest, 429, 1829. _Prestes_, _pl._ 2583.

Priken, _v._ S. to spur a horse, ride briskly, 2639.

Prud, _adj._ S. proud, 302.

Pulten, _pa. t. pl._ so reads the MS. l. 1023, instead of _putten_. Both
have the same signification. So in the Romance of _Rob. of Cecyle_,
Harl. MS. 1701, f. 94, c. 1, _pulte_ occurs for _put_, placed, and
_pylt_ in R. Cœur de L. 4085; pelte, Sir Tr. p. 95. In the _imp._ _Pult_
for _put_, _place_, is used in _Hending the Hende_, MS. Digb. 86. In the
signification of _drove forward_, which is nearer to the sense we
require, we find _pylte_ in K. Horn, 1433, and R. Glouc. Hence the Engl.
word _pelt_. _See_ Putten. Cf. _Pult_ in Gl. to _Will. of Palerne_.

Pund, _n. pl._ S. pounds, 1633.

Put, _n._ cast, throw, 1055. _But_, 1040.

Putten, _v._ to cast, throw, propel forward, 1033, 1044. _Puten_, 1051.
_Putte_, _pa. t._ cast, 1052. _Putten_, _pa. t. pl._ cast, threw, 1023,
1031, 1844. From the Fr. _bouter_, Teut. _buitten_, or Belg. _botten_,
to drive or propel forward, or, as others suggest, from the Br.
_pwtiaw_, which has the same meaning, or Isl. _potta_. From the same
root are derived both _Put_ and _But_. Thus to _butt_ in Sc. is to drive
at a stone in curling, and to _put_ in Yorksh. is to push with the
horns. In the passage before us it is applied to a particular game,
formerly in great repute. _See_ Note on l. 1022. Cf. Ramsay’s Poems, ii.
106. The word is still retained in the North, and Sc. V. Jam. and
Brockett. See _But_ and _Pulten_.

Putting, Puttinge, _n._ casting, 1042, 1057, 2324.

Pyment, _n._ B.L. spiced wine, 1728. _See_ Note on l. 1726.


Qual, _n._ S. [_hwæl_] whale or grampus, 753. _See_ Hwel.

Quan, Quanne, _adv._ S. when, 134, 204, 240, &c. _See_ Hwan.

Quath, _pa. t._ S. quoth, 606, 642, &c. _Hwat_, 1650, 1878. _Wat_, 595.
_Quod_, 1888. _Quodh_, 1801. _Quot_, 1954, 2808. _Couth_, 2606.

Queme, _adj._ S. agreeable, 130, 393. Web., Rits. M. R., Rob. Br., R.
Glouc., Gower, Chauc.

Quen, _n._ S. queen, 2760, 2783, &c. _Quenes_, _pl._ 2982.

Qui. _See_ Hwi.

Quic, Quik, _adj._ S. alive, 612, 613, 1405, 2210, 2476, &c., _quik and
ded_. This is the usual language of the Inquisitiones post mortem, which
commence at the early part of Henry III. reign. For the usage of the
term, _see_ Gl. to Sir Tr. p. 98. Yw. and Gaw. 668. Chron. of Engl. 762,
&c. The word is preserved in the vulgar version of the Scriptures, and
Creed. _Quike_, quick, alert, 1348. _Al quic wede_, 2641. Cf. l. 2387.

Quiste, _n._ S. [_cwide_] bequest, will, 219, 365. _Quede_, K. Alisaund.
8020.

Quod, Quodh, Quot. _See_ Quath.


Radde. _See_ Rede.

Ran. _See_ Renne.

Rang, _adj._ S. [_ranc_] perverse, rebellious, 2561.

Rath, _n._ S. counsel; hence, an adviser, 75. _Dat. c. rathe_, in the
phrase _to rathe_, 2542; for the meaning of which, _see_ Red.

Raþe, _adv._ S. speedily, readily, quickly, 358, &c. (In l. 1335,
I prefer considering it as a verb.)

Rathe, _v._ S. [_rædan_] to advise, 1335. A provincial pronunciation of
_Rede_. In l. 2817, it is still broader, “Yif ye it wilen and ek
_rothe_.” In the same manner _Rode_ is spelt, and was undoubtedly
pronounced _Rothe_, Ly Beaus Desc. 425, and _Abode_ is spelt _Abothe_,
ib. 1118. Cf. ll. 693, 1681, 2585, of the present poem, in all which
instances the _d_ in _rede_ has the sound of _th_.

Recke, _pr. t. subj._ S. may reck, may care, 2047, 2511. Sir Tr. p. 124,
&c.

Red, _n._ S. advice, counsel, 180, 518, 826, 1194, 2871, &c. _To rede_,
lit. for a counsel, i.e. advisable, 118, 693; spelt _to rathe_, 2542.

Rede, _v._ S. to direct, advise, 104, 148, 361, 687, &c. _Radde_, _pa.
t._ advised, 1353. V. Jam. in v. and Hearne’s Gl. to R. Glouc.

Reft, Refte, Reftes. _See_ Reue.

Regne, _pr. t. pl._ Fr. Lat. reign, assume the superiority, 2586.
_Reng_, _Ring_, Sc. V. Jam. in v.

Renne, _v._ S. to run, 1161, 1904. _Ran on blode_, _pa. t._ 432. So in
Sir Tr. p. 176, _His heued ran on blod_; and in MS. Harl. 2253, f. 128,

  Lutel wot hit any mon hou loue hym haueth y-bounden,
  That for vs o the rode _ron_, ant bohte vs with is wounde.

Reue, _n._ S. magistrate, 1627. _See_ Greyue.

Reue, Reuen, _v._ S. [_reafian_] to take away, bereave, rob, 480, 2590,
2991. _Refte_, _pa. t._ took away, bereaved, 2223, 2485. _Reftes_, _pa.
t. 2 p._ tookest away, 2394. _Reft_, _part. pa._ taken away, bereaved,
1367, 1672, 2483; spoiled, 2004. Still used in the North.

Reures, _n. pl._ S. robbers, bereavers, 2104.

  Alle bacbiteres wendet to helle,
  Robberes & _reueres_ & the monquelle.

    _A lutel sermun_, MS. Cal. A. ix. f. 246, b.

V. Jam. in v. _Reyffar_.

Reunesse, Rewnesse, _n._ S. compassion, 502, 2227.

Rewe, _v._ S. to have pity, to compassionate, 497, 967. _Rewede_, _pa.
t._ (_impersonal_) 503.

Richelike, _adv._ S. richly, 421.

Ricth, Ricthe. _See_ Rith, Rithe.

Ricthwise, _adj._ S. [_rihtwis_] righteous, just, 37. Rits., Web. M. R.,
Rob. Br., Minot, Lynds., R. Hood. [MS. _has_ rirth wise.]

Riden, _v._ S. to ride, 10, &c.

Rig, _n._ S. back, 1775. So in Laȝam. l. 6718. Burne he warp on _rigge_.

Rike, _n._ S. kingdom, 290. _Heuene riche_, 133, 407. _See_ Cunnriche.

Rim, Rym, _n._ S. Fr. rhyme, poem, 21, 2995, 2998. So Chauc. _Rime of
Sire Thopas._ [The modern false spelling _rhyme_ is due to confusion of
Eng. _rime_ with the Gk. _rhythm_.]

Ringen, _v._ S. to ring, 242, 1106. _Ringes_, _pr. t. sing._ ring, 390.
_Rungen_, _part. pa._ rung, 1132.

Ringes, _n. pl._ S. rings of mail, 2740. _See_ Brini.

Rippe, _n._ fish-basket, 893. Hence a _Rippar_, B. Lat. _riparius_, is a
person who brings fish from the coast to sell in the interior. V. Spelm.
in v. Nares prefers the etymology of _ripa_, but without reason. _Rip_
is still provincial for an osier basket. _See_ Jam. and Moore. So also
in a curious Latin and English Vocabulary, written out by Sire John
Mendames, Parson of Bromenstrope [Broomsthorp, Co. Norf.] in the middle
of the 15th cent., and now preserved in the valuable MSS. library of
T. W. Coke, Esq. _Cophinus_ is explained _A beryng lepe_, or _ryppe_,
terms still retained in the county. Jam. gives Icel. _hrip_, a basket.

Rith, Ricth, _n._ S. right, justice, inheritance, 36, 395, 1099, 1383,
2717.

Rith, _adj._ S. right (_dexter_), 604, 1812, 2140, 2545, 2725.

Rithe, Ricthe, _adj._ S. right (_rectus_), 772, 846, 1201, 2235, 2473.

Rith, Rithe, _adv._ S. rightly, 420, 1701, 2611, &c.; exactly, just,
872, 2494, 2506.

Ritte, _v._ to rip, make an incision, 2495.

  The breche adoun he threst,
  He _ritt_, and gan to right.

    _Sir Tristr._ p. 33.

[Cf. Sw. _rista_, Dan. _riste_, to slash, cut; G. _ritzen_. Perhaps
connected also with Du. _rijten_, G. _reissen_, to tear.]

Robben, _v._ S. to rob, 1958.

Rode, _n._ S. the rood, cross, 103, 431, 1357, &c. V. Todd’s Gl.
Illustr. Chauc.

Rof, _n._ S. roof, 2082.

Rome, _v._ S. to roam, travel about, 64.

Rore, _v._ S. to roar, 2496, &c. _Rorede_, _pa. t._ roared, 2438.

Roser, _n._ Fr. rose-bush, 2919. Chauc., Pers. Tale, _De luxuria_.

Rothe. _See_ Rathe.

Rowte, _v._ S. [_hrutan_] to roar, 1911. R. Cœur de L. 4304. V. Gl.
Lynds. and Jam. in v. Cf. Icel. _hrjota_, Sw. _ryte_. The word is still
retained in the provinces. V. Brockett and Wilbr.

Runci, _n._ B. Lat. a horse of burden, 2569. V. Du Cange and Spelm. The
word is common both in Fr. and Engl. writers. Cf. Span. _Rozin-ante_.

Rungen. _See_ Ringen.

Rym. _See_ Rim.


Sal _for_ Shall, 628.

Same _for_ Shame, 1941. V. Jam.

Samen, _adv._ S. together, 467, 979, 1717, &c. Web., Rits. M. R., Rob.
Br. So also in Sc. V. Jam.

Samened, _part. pa._ S. assembled, united, 2890. Web., R. Br. p. 2.

Sare, _adv._ S. sore, sorrowfully, 401.

Sat, _pa. t._ S. opposed, 2567. _See_ Atsitte. In Sc. is _Sit_, _Sist_,
to stop, from Lat. _sistere_. V. Jam.

Sautres, _n. pl._ Fr. Lat. Psalters, Hymns for the Office of the Dead,
244.

Sawe, _written for_ sa we, i.e. say we, 338.

Sawe, Sawen, Say. _See_ Se.

Sayse, _v._ B. Lat. to seise, give seisin or livery of land, 251, 2518.
_Seysed_, _pa. t._ seised, 2931, _part. pa._ 2513. Horn Childe, ap.
Rits. M. R. V. 3, p. 309.

Scabbed, Skabbed, _adj._ S. Lat. scabby, scurvy, 2449, 2505.

Scaþe, _n._ S. harm, injury, 1352. _Scaþes_, _pl._ 269. R. Br., V. Gl.
_Skaith_, Sc. V. Jam.

Sche, Scho, Sho, _pron._ S. she, 112, 126, 649, 1721, &c.

Schifte _for_ Shrift, absolution, 1829.

Schoten, Shoten, _pa. t. pl._ S. shot, cast, 1838, 1864. _Scuten_, 2431.
[_Shoten_, in l. 1838, means _rushed_, _darted_, _flew_.]

Schulle, _n._ a plaice, 759. Sw. _skolla_, a plaice. _See_ Coleridge’s
Glossarial Index.

Se (_the_ S. _art._) the, but perhaps a mistake of the scribe, l. 534,
as it is not elsewhere used.

Se, _n._ S. sea, 535, &c.; _gen._ seis, 321.

Se, Sen, _v._ S. to see, 1021, 1273, &c. _Sest_, _pr. t. 2 p._ seest,
534. _Sen_, _pr. t. pl._ see, 168, 1217. _Sawe_, _Sowe_, _pa. t._ saw,
1182, 1323. _Say_, 881. _Sawen_, _Sowen_, _pa. t. pl._ 957, 1055, 2255.
_Sene_, _part. pa._ 656.

Seckes, _n. pl._ S. sacks, 2019.

Segges, _n. pl._ Fr. [_seches_] 896. In Cotgr. the _Seche_ is explained
the Sound, or Cuttle fish. The _Seches de Coutance_ were held in the
highest estimation. V. Le Grand. _See_ also Jam. v. _Sye_.

Sei, _v._ _See_ Seyen.

Seis. _See_ Se.

Seken, _v._ S. to seek, 1629. The reading is confirmed by an old poem in
MS. Digb. 86.

  Sire, we ben knizttes fer i-fare,
  For to _sechen_ wide-ware.

    _La vie seint Eustace, qui out noun Placidas._

Selcouth, _n._ S. wonder, strange thing, 124, 1059. _Selcuth_, 2119. It
was in all probability originally an _adj._ as _Selkuth_. Strange,
wonderful, 1284.

Sele, _n._ S. seal, 755.

Seli, _adj._ S. simple, harmless, 477, 499. R. Gl., Chauc.

Selthe, _n._ S. success, 1338. A.S. _sélð_. [Cf. _selehðe_ in _Laȝam._
l. 25136, and see _selehðe_ in Stratmann’s Dictionary of Old English.
The line seems to be a proverb, and the meaning is-- “Rest and success
are companions.” Goldborough tells him to avoid delay, since rest may
accompany success, but cannot precede it.]

Sembling, _n._ Fr. assembling, 1018. It may also be compared with the
Su.-G. _samlung_, conventus.

Semes, _pr. t._ in the phrase, _hire semes_ = it beseems her, it becomes
her, 2916. _Semede_, _pa. t._ was suitable, was fit, 976. See _Seem_ in
Wedgwood.

Sen, Sene. _See_ Se.

Sendes, _pr. t._ sendeth, sends, 2392. _Sende_, _pa. t._ sent, 136, &c.

Serf-borw, _n._ S. surety, pledge, 1667. In MS. Soc. Antiq. No. 60,
known by the name of _The Black Book of Peterborough_, is an instrument
in which many names both of Saxon and Danish origin appear as the
_Borhhanda_, or Sureties, otherwise called _Festermen_. See Jam. and the
Glossaries, for further examples.

Serganz, _n. pl._ Fr. attendants, officers, 2088, 2091, 2116.
_Sergaunz_, 1929, 2361, 2371. _Seriaunz_, 2066. V. Spelm. in v.
_Servientes_, and Hickes, Thes. T. i. p. 148.

Serges. _See_ Cerges.

Serk, _n._ S. shirt, 603. Emare, 501. R. Br.

Seruen, _v._ S. to serve, 1230.

Seruede, _pa. t._ S. deserved, 1914. Web. M. R. So in Sc. V. Jam.

Sest. _See_ Se.

Sette, _v._ S. to set, descend, 2671.

Sette, _pa. t._ S. set, placed, 2405; appointed, 2571. _Setten_, _pa. t.
pl._ set, 1211. _Sette_, _part. pa._ set, placed, 2612.

Seyen, _v._ S. to say, 2886. _Seyst_, _pr. t. 2 p._ sayest, 2008.
_Seyde_, _pa. t. 3 p._ said, 117, &c. _Seyden_, _pa. t. pl._ said, 376,
1213. _Seyden_, have said, 456. _Sey_, _part. pa._ said, 2993.

Seysed. _See_ Sayse.

Seyst. _See_ Seyen.

Seyt, _pr. t. s._ put for _sey it_, i.e. say it; or else put for
_seyth_, i.e. say, 647. So in Sir Tr. p. 117,

  For mani men _seyt_ ay whare.

Shaltou, shalt thou, 1800. _Shaltow_, 1322. _Shaltu_, 2180, 2186, 2882,
2901.

Shamelike, _adv._ S. shamefully, disgracefully, 2825. _Schamliche_, Sir
Tr. p. 93.

Shankes, _n. pl._ S. legs, 1903. _Sconke_, Laȝam. l. 15215. _See_ Rits.
A. S. p. 16, and Diss. p. xxxi. _Schankis_, Sc. V. Jam.

Shar, _pa. t._ S. share, cut, 1413. So in Am. and Amil. 2298, Her
throtes he _schar atvo_.

Shauwe, Shawe, _v._ S. to shew, 2206, 2784. _Sheu_, 1401.

Shel, Sheld, _n._ S. shield, 489, 624, 1653, &c.

Shende, _v._ S. to ruin, destroy, 1422. Bevis of H. ap. Ellis, M. R.
V. 2, p. 99. Chauc. _Shent_, _pa. t._ shamed, disgraced, 2749; _part.
pa._ shend, 2845. The more common sense of this verb is the latter. V.
Jam.

Shere. Clearly miswritten for _she were_, 1250.

Sheu. _See_ Shauwe.

Shides, _n. pl._ S. It here expresses pieces of wood cleft at the end,
917. In Doug. Virg. _Schide_ signifies a billet of wood, 223, 10; or a
chip, splinter, 207, 8. So in _Rauf Coilzear_, st. 39, Schaftes of
schene wode they scheueride in _schides_. So also in P. Pl. The word is
preserved in Lanc. This custom of skinning eels by inserting the head in
a cleft stick, is still practised, we are informed, in the fish markets.

Shir, _adj._ S. bright, 588, 916, 1253, &c.

Shireue, _n._ S. sheriff, 2286. _Shireues_, _pl._ 266.

Sho, _pron._ _See_ Sche.

Sho, _v._ S. to shoe, 1138.

Shof, _pa. t._ S. shoved, pushed, 871, 892.

Shol, _1 p. s._ (if I) shall, 1782. _Sal_, I shall, 628. _Shole_, _pl._
shall, 562, 645, 1788. _Shul_, 328. _Sholen_, 621, 1127, 1230, &c.
_Shulen_, 731, 747, &c. _Shoren_ (so in MS.), 1640. _Sule_, shall ye,
will ye, 2419. _Shude_, I should, 1079. _Sholdest_, shouldst, 2712.
_Sholden_, _pl._ 1020, 1195. _Shulden_, 941.

Sholdre, _n._ S. shoulder, 2738. _Shuldre_, 604, 1262. _Shudre-blade_,
2644. _Sholdres_, _pl._ shoulders, 1647, 1818. _Shuldren_, 982.

Shon, _n. pl._ S. shoes, 860, 969.

Shop, _qu._ Shok, shook, struck, destroyed, 1101. But Sewel gives Du.
_schoppen_, to strike. Cf. Eng. _chop_.

Shotshipe, n. S. [_scot_, symbolum, _scipe_, societas] An assembly of
persons who pay pecuniary contribution or reckoning, 2099.

  For al Sikelines quiden
  _Sotscipe_ heo heolden,
  And swa longe swa beoð æuere,
  Ne scal hit stonde næuere.

    _Laȝam._ l. 23177.

Cf. _sotschipes_, _pl._ in Leg. of St. Kath. MS. Cott. Tit. D 18, fol.
144 _b_. _See_ Nares, _v._ _Shot-clog_.

Shrede, _n._ S. a fragment, piece cut off, 99. [As it was given off the
“board,” to “feed the poor,” it must mean a piece of bread or meat.
Correct “_shrede_ = clothing” in Coleridge’s Glossarial Index.]

Shres, _n._ S. shears, 857.

Shride, _v._ S. to clothe (himself), 963. _Shrid_, _part. pa._ clothed,
978.

Shriue, Shriuen, _v._ S. to confess, make confession, 362, 2598.
_Shriue_, _Shriuen_, _part. pa._ 364, 2489.

Shrud, _n._ S. clothing, 303.

Shude, Shul, Shulen. _See_ Shol.

Shuldre, Shuldren. _See_ Sholdre.

Shuldreden, _pa. t. pl._ S. shouldered, 1056.

Sibbe, _adj._ S. related, allied, 2277. Sir Tr. p. 44. _See_ Fremde.

Siden, _n. pl._ S. sides, 371.

Sike, _v._ S. to sigh, 291.

Siking, _n._ S. sighing, 234.

Sikerlike, _adv._ S. surely, 422, 625, 2301, 2707, 2871. _Sikerly_, Sir
Tr. p. 35, &c.

Sikernesse, _n._ S. surety, security, 2856. R. Glouc., R. Br., Chauc.

Simenels, _n. pl._ Fr. 779, a finer sort of bread, “q. a _simila_ h. e.
puriori farinæ parte.” _Spelm._ Assis. pan. 51 Hen. III. _Symnellus_
vero de quadrante ponderabit 2 sol. minus quam Wastellum. It elsewhere
appears to be a sort of cake, or cracknel. So in the _Crieries de
Paris_, v. 163, Chaudes tartes et _siminiaus_. V. Nares in v.

Sinne, _n._ S. fault, 1976. _Ne for loue ne for sinne_, 2375. _Wolde he
nouth for sinne lette_, 2627. Traces of this phrase may be elsewhere
found:

  Neyther for _love_ nor yet for _awe_
  Lyuinge man none than they saw.

    _Sir Degore_, c. iv.

  Maboun and Lybeauus
  Faste togedere hewes,
    And stente _for no synne_.

    _Ly Beaus Desc._ 1957.

Sire, Syre, _n._ Fr. The term in ll. 310, 1229, is used not only to
express respect, but command. A parallel passage is in R. Cœur de L.
2247. It simply means _Sir_, ll. 909, 2009.

Site, _v._ S. to sit, 2809. _Sittes_, _pr. t. 2 p._ sittest, 1316.
_Sitten_, _pr. t. pl._ sit, 2098. _Site on knes_, i.e. kneel, 2708.

Siþe, Siþen, _adv._ S. then, afterwards, after, 399, 472, 1414, 1814,
1988, &c.

Siþe, _n._ S. time, 1052. _Siþe_, _Siþes_, _pl._ 213, 778, 1737, 2189.
_Syþe_, _Syþes_, 2162, 2843. Sir Tr. p. 55, &c.

Sket, _adv._ quickly, soon, 1926, 1960, 2303, 2493, 2513, 2574, 2736,
2839. Sir Tr. pp. 36, 40, &c.; Ly Beaus Desc. 484; K. Alisaund. 3047;
R. Cœur de L. 806; Rom. of Merlin, ap. Ellis, M. R. V. i. p. 228. [Icel.
_skjótt_, quickly, from _skjótr_, quick, swift. The adj. is still
preserved in the surname Skeat _or_ Skeet.]

Skirming, _n._ Fr. skirmishing, 2323. Web. M. R. _See_ Note on l. 2320.

Slawe, Slawen. _See_ Slo.

Slenge, _v._ S. to sling, cast out, 2435. _Slenget_, _part. pa._ slung,
1923.

Slepes, _pr. t. 2 p._ sleepest, 1283.

Sleie, Sley, _adj._ skilful, expert, 1084, 2116. Sir Tr. pp. 23, 28;
Horn Childe, ap. Rits. M. R. V. 3, p. 296; Emare, 67; R. Glouc. p. 350;
Barb. xix. 179; Doug. 137, 12. Jamieson derives it from Su.-G. _slug_,
Isl. _slægr_. Cf. Sw. _slug_.

Slike, _adv. or perhaps adj._ smoothly, or smooth, 1157. “_Slyke_, or
smothe. _Lenis_.” Prompt. Parv.

Slo, _n._ S. sloe, berry, 849, 2051.

Slo, _v._ S. to slay, 512, 1364, 1412, &c. _Slou_, 2543. _Slos_, _pr. t.
2 p._ slayest, 2706. _Slos_, _imp. pl._ strike ye, 2596. _Slou_, _Slow_,
_pa. t._ slew, 501; struck, 2633. _Slowe_, _Slowen_, _pa. t. pl._ slew,
2414, 2427, 2432; struck, fought, 2683. _Slawe_, _Slawen_, _part. pa._
slain, 1803, 1928, 2000, &c. In l. 2747 (as in 2596, 2633, 2683) it has
only the sense of _struck_, wounded, agreeably to the signification of
the original word, _sleán_, _sleáhan_, Cædere, ferire.

Smerte, _adj. pl._ S. painful, 2055.

Smerte, _v._ S. to smart, 2647.

Smot, _pa. t._ S. smote, 2654.

So, a large tub, 933. See _So_ in Halliwell. Dan. _saa_, a pail.

So, _conj._ S. as, 279, 349, _et pass._

Softe, _adj._ S. of a mild disposition, 991.

Softe, _adv._ S. gently, 2618.

Somdel, _adj._ S. somewhat, in some measure, 240. _Sumdel_, 450, 497,
1054, 2306, 2950. Web., R. Gl., Chauc.

Sond, _n._ S. sand, 708, 735.

Sone, _n._ S. son, 660, 839. _Sones_, _pl._ 2980.

Sone, _adv._ S. soon, 78, &c.; so soon as, 1354.

Sor, _n._ S. sorrow, 234. _Sorwe_, 1374; pain, sore, 1988.

Sor, _adj._ S. sore, detestable, 2229. [Perhaps it should be _sori_.]

Sorful, _adj._ S. sorrowful, 151, 2541.

Sori, _adj._ S. sorrowful, 151, 477.

Soth, Sothe, _n._ S. truth, 36, 647, 2008, &c.

Soþlike, _adv._ S. truly, 276.

Soupe, _v._ Fr. to sup, 1766.

Southe, _pa. t._ S. sought, 1085.

Sowe, Sowen. _See_ Se.

Sowel, _n._ victuals, 767, 1143, 2905. Properly, anything eaten with
bread as a relish. See _Sool_ in Halliwell. Dan. _suul_.

Span-newe, _adj._ quite new, 968. This is the earliest instance on
record of the use of this word. For its disputed etymology see Jam.,
Nares, Todd’s Johns., and Thoms. Etymons; but especially Wedgwood’s
Etym. Dict. _Span_ = chip; _Span-new_, chip-new. A.S. _spón_. It occurs
in Chauc. Troil. iii. 1671.

Sparkede, _pa. t._ S. sparkled, 2144.

Spede, _v._ S. to speed, prosper, 1634.

Speke, _n._ S. speech, 946.

Speke, Speken, _v._ S. to speak, 326, 369, 548, 1070, &c. _Spak_, _pa.
t._ spoke, 2389, 2968. _Speken_, _part. pa._ spoken, 2369.

Spelle, _n._ S. story, relation, 338. K. Horn, 951.

Spelle, _v._ S. to relate, tell forth, 15, 2530.

Spen _for_ Spent, 1819.

Sperd, Sperde, _part. pa._ S. barred, bolted, 414, 448. Still common in
the North. V. Brockett.

Spille, _v._ S. to perish, 2422. _Of limes spille_, 86, suffer the loss
of limbs. K. Horn, 202. Web., Chauc.

Spired, _part. pa._ S. speered, inquired, 2620. V. Jam. in v.

Spore, _n._ S. spur, 2569.

Sprauleden, _pa. t. pl._ S. sprawled, 475.

Sprong, _pa. t._ S. sprung, 959. _See_ the Note. _Sprongen_, 869.
_Sprungen_, _part. pa._ risen, 1131.

Sprote, _n._ S. sprout, 1142. A.S. _sprote_, a sprig, sprout.

Spuse, Spusen, _v._ S. to espouse, marry, 1123, 1170, 2875. _Spusede_,
_pa. t. pl._ espoused, 2887. _Spused_, _part. pa._ 1175, 2928. _Spuset_,
1266.

Spusing, _n._ S. espousals, marriage, 1164, 1177, 2886.

Stac, _n._ S. 814. [This I believe to mean simply a stack, or heap, like
the Dan. _stak_, Sw. _stack_. I add Sir F. Madden’s note in the edition
of 1828.] A stack, or, more properly, _stick_ of fish, a term applied to
eels when strung on a row, ‘sic dicta, quod trajecta vimine (quod _stic_
dicimus) connectebantur.’ _Spelm._ A _stica_ consisted of 25 eels, and
10 _Sticæ_ made a _Binde_. Glanv. lib. 2, c. 9.

Stalworþi, Stalworþe, Stalwrthe, adj. S. strong, valiant, courageous,
24, 904, 1027, &c. _Stalworþeste_, _sup._ 25.

Stan-ded, _adj._ S. dead as a stone, completely dead, 1815. _Stille als
a ston_, 928. Cf. K. of Tars, 549; Erle of Tol. 754; Launfal, 357. _See_
Gl. to _Partenay_.

Star, _n._ Icel. a species of sedge, 939. Icel. _stör_; Sw. _starr_;
Dan. _stær_. _See_ the Note.

Stareden, _pt. t. pl._ 1037. _Probably miswritten for_ Stradden,
contended. Cf. Su.-Goth. and Sw. _strida_, to contend.

Starinde, _part. pr._ staring, 508.

Stark, _adj._ S. stiff, stout, strong, 341, 380, 608, &c. V. Jam. in v.

Stede, _n._ S. steed, horse, 10, &c.

Stede, _n._ S. place, 142, 744. _Stedes_, _pl._ 1846.

Stem, _n._ S. a ray of light, beam, 591. It is equivalent to _Glem_,
l. 2122.

  Therewith he blinded them so close,
  A _stime_ they could not see.

    _R. Hood_, i. 112.

Cf. Brockett’s Gl. in v. _Stime_.

Sternes, _n. pl._ stars, 1809. _Ageyn þe sternes_ = exposed to the sky,
or to the open air.

Stert, _n._ S. leap, 1873. Chaucer has _at a stert_ for immediately,
C. T. 1707.

Stert, _n._ S. [_steort_, cauda] tail, 2323. _Start_ is still retained
in the North.

Steuene, _n._ S. voice, 1275.

Sti, _n._ S. road, way, 2618. Sir Tr. p. 192; Yw. and Gaw. 599; Emare,
196; Sevyn Sages, 712; R. Br. Chaucer uses _stile_ in the same sense,
C. T. 12628, and Minot, p. 5, in both which passages the respective
Editors have made the same mistake in explaining it. [Cf. G. _steg_, a
pass.]

Stille, _adj._ S. quiet, 955, 2309.

Stille, _adv._ S. in a low voice, secretly, 2997. Sir Tr. p. 55;
K. Horn, 315.

Stirt, Stirte, _pa. t._ S. started, leaped, 398, 566, 873, 1049, &c.
_Stirte_, _Stirten_, _pa. t. pl._ started, hurried, 599, 1964, 2609.
Derived by Skinner from S. _astirian_, movere, by Jam. from Teut.
_steerten_, volare. _See_ Astirte. Cf. G. _stürzen_; and see _Start_ in
Wedgwood.

Stith, _n._ S. anvil, 1877. Chauc. Still provincial. V. Moore, and
Brockett.

Stiward, _n._ S. steward, 666.

Stonden, _n._ S. to stand, 689. _Stondes_, _pr. t. 3 p._ standeth,
stands, 2240, 2983. _Stod_, _pa. t._ stood, 591, 679. _Stoden_, _pa. t.
pl._ 1037.

Stor, _adj._ S. hardy, stout, 2383. Laȝam. l. 9126; Yw. and Gaw. 1297;
Chron. of Engl. 464; Sq. of Lowe D. 658; Ly Beaus Desc. 1766. _Steir_,
_Sture_, Sc. ap. Jam. Cf. Sw. _stor_.

Stra, _n._ S. straw, 315, 466. A.S. _streow_, _streaw_. Cf. Strie.

Strenes, _pr. t. 3 p._ S. begets, 2983. From _streónan_, gignere. Cf.
K. Alisaund. 7057.

Strie, _n._ a straw, 998. _See_ Stra.

Strout, _n._ dispute, contention, 1039. Cf. A.S. _strúdan_, and
_Strother_ in Atkinson’s Cleveland Glossary.

Stroute, _v._ S. to make a disturbance, 1779. Bosworth explains A.S.
_strúdan_, _strútian_, as having originally the sense to bustle about.

Stunde, _n._ S. short space of time, 2614. V. Gl. to R. Glouc. _See_
Vmbestonde.

Sturgiun, Sturgun, _n._ sturgeon, 753, 1727. Cf. Sw. _stör_, Dan.
_stör_.

Suere, Suereth. _See_ Sweren.

Suete, _adj._ S. sweet, 1388. Cf. l. 2927.

Sueyn, Sweyn, _n._ S. swain, villain, 343, 1328, &c. _Sweynes_, _pl._
371, 2195. It is generally used in opposition to _knight_.

Svich, _adj._ S. such, 60.

Suilk, _adj._ such (things), 644. _See_ Swilk.

Sule. _See_ Shol.

Sumdel. _See_ Somdel.

Sunne-bem, _n._ S. sun-beam, 592, 2123.

Swerd, _n._ S. sword, 1759, &c. _Swerdes_, _pl._ 1769, 2659.

Sweren, _v._ S. to swear, 494. _Suereth_, _pr. t. s._ swear, 647.
_Swor_, _pa. t._ swore, 398, 2367. _Suere_, _pr. subj. 2 p. s._ 388.

Swike, _n._ S. deceiver, traitor, 423, 551, 626, 1158, 2401, 2451, &c.
_Swikes_, _pl._ 2834, 2990. Laȝam. l. 12942; R. Gl. p. 105.

Swikel, _adj._ S. deceitful, 1108.

  For alle þine witien
  Beoð swiðe _swikele_.

    _Laȝam._ l. 15848.

  Hoe beth of _swikele_ kunne
  Ther mide the witherwinne.

    _The sawe of Seint Bede_, MS. Digb. 86.

  He was _suikel_, fals, ant fel.

    _Chron. of Engl._ 791.

Swilen, _v._ S. [_swilian_, Ps. vi. 6] to wash, 919. It occurs also in
Rob. of Brunne’s _Handling Sinne_, l. 5828. Still provincial.

Swilk, _adj._ S. such, 1118, 1625, 2123, 2684, 2783. _Suilk_, 644.

Swinge, _v._ S. to beat, chastise (used _passively_), 214. _Swngen_,
_part. pa._ beaten, 226. Laȝam. l. 21070. So in _Syr Bevys_, C. ii. All
at ones on him they _swonge_. In the North the verb retains the same
meaning; v. Brockett.

Swink, _n._ S. labour, 770, 801, 2456.

Swinken, _v._ S. to labour, 798. _Swank_, _pa. t._ laboured, 788.

Swire, _n._ S. neck, 311. Formerly in universal use, and still preserved
in the provinces.

Swiþe, Swyþe, _adv._ S. very, exceedingly, 110, 217, 341. Quickly, 140,
682, 690; _ful swithe_, 2436, appears a pleonasm. _Swithe forth and
rathe_, quickly forth, and soon, 2594.

Swot, _n._ S. sweat, perspiration, 2662. The word has the same meaning
in Cædmon, f. 24, ed. Thorpe, p. 31, l. 8, which seems to contradict Mr
Price’s assertion to the contrary, in Warton’s Hist. Engl. Poetr.
p. lxxi., ed. 1840.

Swngen. _See_ Swinge.

Syre. _See_ Sire.

Syþe, Syþes. _See_ Siþe.

Syþe, _n._ S. scythe, 2553, 2699.


Tabour, _n._ Fr. tabor, 2329.

Tale, _n._ S. number, 2026.

Taleuaces, _n. pl._ Fr. large shields, 2323. _See_ the Note on l. 2320.

Tarst (_so in_ MS.), 2688; almost certainly an error for _faste_, which
appears in the next line. Also, the movements of Godard are compared to
the course of lightning.

Tauhte, _pt. s._ committed, 2214, probably an error for _bitauhte_.
_See_ Bitaken.

Tel, _n._ S. deceit, reproach, 191, 2219. A.S. _tálu_.

Telle, _v._ S. to count, number, 2615. _Told_, _part. pa._ numbered,
esteemed, 1036.

Tene, _n._ S. grief, affliction, 729.

Tere, _v._ S. to tar (used passively), 707.

Teth, _n. pl._ S. teeth, 2406.

Teyte, _adj._ S. 1841, 2331. [Explained “lively” by Coleridge,
Stratmann, and Morris, as if from Icel. _teitr_, hilaris. This I believe
to be completely wrong. The word occurs in Allit. Poems, ed. Morris, B.
871, with reference to _tight_ lasses, and in l. 1841 of Havelok we have
a reference to _tight_ lads. In l. 2331 it may also mean _flawless_,
staunch. “_Theet_, _adj._ water-tight. O.N. _þiettr_ or _þéttr_, densus,
solidus. O.Sw. _thæter_, Sw. Dial, _tjett_ or _tjætt_, Dan. _tætt_,
Germ. _dicht_. Ihre gives . . . . _ett tätt fat_, a flawless vessel.
‘_Thyht_, hool fro brekynge, not brokyn. _Integer_, _solidus_. Prompt.
Parv.’” Atkinson’s Glossary of the Cleveland dialect.] [_Teyte_ may mean
_lively_. My explanation is not generally accepted.]

Þa, _written for_ þat, 175.

Þan, Þanne, _adv._ S. then, 51, 1044, &c.; when, 226, 248, _et sæpius_;
than if (_quàm_), 944, 1867.

Þar, _adv._ where (?) 130. _See_ the Note; and cf. _Þer_.

Þare, _adv._ S. there, 2481, 2739. Cf. þer, þore.

Þarne, _v._ to lose, be deprived of, 2492, 2835. _Þarnes_, _pr. t._
wants, is deprived of, 1913. _Þarned the ded_, 1687; [clearly miswritten
for _þoled þe ded_, suffered death. The scribe was thinking of _þarned
þe lif_; cf. l. 2492.] The verb only exists in the Sax. in the pt. t.
_þærnode_, Chron. Sax. p. 222, ed. Gibs., which is derived by Lye from
the Cimbr. _At thuerna_, or _thorna_, diminui, privari. V. Hickes Thes.
I. p. 152. [I.e. it is from the root of the Sw. _tarfva_, Icel.
_thurfa_, Goth. _thaurban_, with the _f_ dropped, and with the addition
of the _passive_ or _neuter_ infinitive-ending denoted by _-ne_, like
_-na_ in Sw., _-nan_ in Mœso-Gothic. See _þarrnenn_ in Gl. to Ormulum.]

Þas, _read_ Was, 1129. [As þ at the beginning of a word is never put for
_t_, it is not = Sc. _tas_, takes, as some have suggested.]

Þaue, v. S. [_þafian_] to grant, 296; bear, sustain, 2696. Ormulum,
5457.

Thayn, _n._ S. nobleman, 2184. _Thein_, 2466. _Thaynes_, _pl._ 2260.
_Theynes_, 2194. _See_ Kayn.

Þe, _n._ S. thigh, 1950. _Þhe_, 1984. _Þes_, _pl._ 1903. _Þhes_, 2289.

Þe, _adv._ S. (_written for_ þer), there, 142, 476, 863, 933. _Þe with_,
therewith, 639. _See_ Þer.

Þe, _conj._ S. though, 1682. _Þei_, 1966. _Þey_, 807, 992, 1165, 2501.
_See_ Þou.

Þede, _n._ S. country, dwelling, 105; place, 2890. Web., Le Bone Flor.
246. R. Br. p. 18. V. Jam.

Þef, _n._ S. thief, 2434. _Þeues_, _pl._ 1780.

Þei, _pron._ S. they, 1020, 1195, &c.

Þei, Þey, _conj._ though. _See_ Þe.

Þenke, _pr. subj._ S. think, 2394. _Þenkeste_, _pr. t. 2 p._ thinkest
thou, 578.

Þenne, _adv._ S. thence, 1185. [Perhaps in l. 777, we should put the
comma after _þenne_; “when he came thence,” &c.]

Þer, _adv._ S. where, 318, 448, &c.; there, _passim_; the place whence,
1740. _Þerinne_, therein, 535, &c. _Þerhinne_, 322. _Þerof_, _Þeroffe_,
thereof, 372, 466, 1068, &c. _Þerþoru_, by that means, 1098. _Þertil_,
_Þerto_, thereto, 396, 1041, 1045. _Þerwit_, _Þerwith_, therewith, 1031,
1046. _See_ Þe, Þore.

Þere, _pron._ S. their, 1350.

Þerl _for_ Þe erl, the earl, 178.

Þertekene, 2878. [Coleridge’s Glossarial Index has “Thertekene = mark
thereto. A.S. _tácnian_.” But this is a very awkward phrase, and I
should prefer to suppose _þer-tekene_ = by the token, i.e. in token.
_Tekene_ answers to the Sw. _tecken_, a token; and _þer_ is found as a
prefix in _P. Plowman_ in the phr. _þer-while_ = _þe while_, i.e. in the
time that. The only difficulty is that _þer_ is properly feminine (A.S.
_þære_), whilst _tecken_ in Sw. and _tácen_ in A.S. are neuter. _In
tokne_ (= in token) occurs in Shoreham’s poems, ed. Wright, 131.]

Þet, _conj._ S. that (_quòd_), 330.

Þet, _pron._ S. that, 879.

Þeþe, Þeþen, _adv._ S. thence, 2498, 2629.

Þeu, Þewe, _n._ S. in a servile condition or station, 262, 2205. R. Gl.

Þewes, _n. pl._ S. manners, 282. Laȝam., Rits. M. R., Web., P. Plowm.,
Chauc., Gl. Lynds., Percy, A. R.

Þi. _See_ Forþi.

Þi _for_ Þy, thy, 2725.

Þider, _adv._ S. thither, 850, 1012, 1021, &c.

Þigge, v. S. [_þicgan_] to beg, 1373. This word is chiefly preserved in
the Sc. writers. Wall. ii. 259; Doug. Virg. 182, 37; Evergreen, ii. 199;
Bannatyne Poems, p. 120, V. Jam. in v., who derives it from Su.-G.
_tigga_, Alem. _thigen_, petere. [See _tigga_ in Ihre. “Thyggynge or
beggynge, _Mendicacio_.” Prompt. Parv.]

Þis _for_ þise, these, 1145.

Þisternesse, _n._ S. darkness, 2191.

  Dalden from þan fihte
  Al bi _þustere_ nihte.

    _Laȝam._ l. 7567; cf. _Gen. and Ex._, 58.

Thit, _pp._ 2990. [The rime shews that the _i_ is long; and, whether the
_th_ is sounded like _t_, or (which is more likely) the word should have
been written _tiht_ or _tith_, we may be tolerably confident that it is
equivalent to the O.E. _tight_ or _tiȝt_, a pp. signifying _intended_,
_purposed_, _designed_, which is the exact sense here required.
Stratmann gives five instances of it, of which one is-- “To brewe the
Crystene mennys banys Hy hadden _tyght_;” Octovian, 1476.]

Þo, _pron._ S. those, 1918, 2044.

Þo, _pron._ thou. _See_ Þu.

Þo, _adv._ S. then, 930; when, 1047. _Thow_, 1669.

Þore, _adv._ S. there, 741, 922, 1014, &c. _Þortil_, thereto, 1443.
_Þorwit_, therewith, 100. _See_ Þe, Þer.

Þoru, _adv._ S. through, 627, 774, 848, &c. _Þoruth_, 1065, 2786.
_Þorw_, 264, 367, 2646. _Þuruth_, 52.

Þoruthlike, _adv._ S. throughly, 680.

Þou, _conj._ S. though, 124, 299, &c. _Þo_, 1020. _See_ Þe.

Þoucte, _pa. t._ S. thought, 504, 507, &c. _Þouthte_, 1073. _Þowthe_,
1869. _Þouthe_, 1166. _Þat god thoucte_, 256, that seemed good. Cf. Sir
Tr. pp. 30, 36. And so in MS. Vernon, Bodl.

  Riche metes was forth brouht
  To all men _that gode thouht_.

    _Disp. betw. a Crystene mon and a Jew_, f. 301.

[Or, if we read “þat god _him_ þoucte,” this would mean “that seemed
good _to him_;” cf. l. 197.]

Þouth, _n._ S. thought, 122, 1190.

Þral, _n._ S. slave, villain, 527, 684, 1097, 1158, 2564, 2589. In an
opprobious sense, 1408. Sir Tr. p. 175.

Þrawe, _n._ S. space of time, moment, 276, 1215. Web., Rits. M. R., Rob.
Br., Doug. Virg. _Þrow_, Chauc., Gower, &c.

Þredde, Þridde, _adj._ S. third, 867, 2633.

Þrette, _pa. t._ S. threatened, 1163.

Þrie, 730. [In the former edition it is glossed “trouble, affliction;
apparently the same as _Tray_ or _Treye_;” cf. A.S. _tréga_. But this
renders the construction difficult, nor is it clear that _treye_ and
_þrie_ can be identified. Without doubt, the usual meaning of _þrie_ is
_thrice_, which is easily construed, only it remains to be shewn why
_thrice_ should be introduced; unless perhaps it signifies _in a
threefold degree._]

Þrinne, _num._ S. three, 716, 761, 1977, 2091.

Þrist, Þristen, _v._ S. to thrust, 1152, 2019, 2725. _Þrist_, _part.
pa._ thrust, 638.

Þu, _pron._ S. thou, 527, &c. _Þou_, 527, &c. _Þo_, 388. _Þw_ (_read_
þat þw _instead of_ þw that?), 1316. _Tow_, 1322. _Tu_, 2903. It is
often joined to the verb which precedes, as _Shaltow_, _Wiltu_, &c. The
_gen._ is _þin_, 1128; the _acc._ is _þe_, 529.

Þurte, _pt. t. s._ need, might, 10. [It answers to the A.S. _þurfan_,
_pt. t._ _ic þorfte_, Icel. _þurfa_, _pt. t._ _þurfti_, Mœso-Goth.
_þaurban_, _pt. t._ _þaurfta_. _See_ Ormulum, l. 16164, and Sir F.
Madden’s note to _þort_ in Gl. to _Will. of Palerne_.]

Þuruth. _See_ Þoru.

Þus _for_ Þis, 785, 2586. (_In comp._ þus-gate.)

Tid, _n._ S. time, hour, 2100.

Til, _prep._ S. to, 141, 762, 864, &c. _See_ Intil, Þertil.

Til, _v._ S. to tell, 1348.

Tilled, _part. pa._ S. obtained, acquired (lit. drawn, taken), 438. V.
Gl. R. Br. in v. _tille_, and see quotation under _Goddot_.

Tinte, _pa. t._ S. lost, 2023. Sir Tr. p. 104. V. Jam.

Tirneden, _pa. t. pl._ S. turned, 603.

Tiþandes, _n. pl._ Icel. tidings, 2279.

To-, in composition with verbs, is usually augmentative, or has the
force of the Lat. _dis-_. _To-brised_, _part. pa._ very much bruised,
1950. (_See_ Brisen.) _To-cruhsse_, _inf._ crush in pieces, 1992.
_To-deyle_, _inf._ divide, 2099. (_See_ Deled.) _To-drawen_, _part. pa._
dragged or pulled to death, 2001. (_See_ Drou.) _To-frusshe_, _inf._
break in pieces, 1993. _To-hewen_, _part. pa._ hewn in pieces, 2001.
_To-riuen_, _part. pa._ torn _or_ riven in pieces, 1953. _To-rof_, _pa.
t._ burst open, 1792. _To-shiuere_, _inf._ shiver in pieces, 1993.
_To-shiuered_, _part. pa._ shivered to pieces, 2667. _To-tere_, _inf._
tear in pieces, 1839. _To-torn_, _part. pa._ torn in pieces, 1948, 2021.
_To-tusede_, _part. pa._ entirely rumpled or tumbled, 1948. In one case
only we find it to be merely the prep. _to_ in composition; viz. in
_To-yede_, _pa. t._ went to, 765. (_See_ Yede.) [_See_ note on this
prefix in Gloss. to _William of Palerne_.]

To, _adv._ S. too, 303, 689, 691, &c.

To, _n._ S. toe, 1743, 1847, &c. _Tos_, _pl._ 898, 2163.

To, _num._ S. two, 2664.

To, _prep._ follows its case in ll. 197, 325, 526.

To-frusshe, _v._ Fr. [_froisser_] to dash or break in pieces, 1993.

  The Sarezynes layde on with mace,
  And al _to-frussched_ hym in the place.

    _R. Cœur de L._ 5032. Cf. 5084.

  He suld sone be _to-fruschyt_ all.

    _Barb._ x. 597.

So also Doug. Virg. 51, 53. V. Jam. in v. _Frusch_.

Togidere, Togydere, _adv._ S. together, 1128, 1181, 2683, 2891.

Tok, _pa. t._ S. took, 354, 467, 537. _Toke_, _pa. t. 2 p._ 1216.
_Token_, _pa. t. pl._ 1194, _Token under fote_, 1199.

Told. _See_ Telle.

Totede, _pa. t._ peeped, looked, 2106. This verb is thrice found in
P. Ploughman’s Crede, ll. 142, 168, 339. Although it would appear a rare
word from its not appearing in Hearne, Ritson, or Weber, yet in later
times it, occurs often, and is instanced by Jamieson from Patten’s
Account of Somerset’s Expedicion, p. 53, and by Nares from Hall,
Latimer, Spenser, and Fairfax. It also occurs four times in the _Ancren
Riwle_, ed. Morton, 1853. In Sc. it is pronounced _Tete_, which is
derived by Jam. from the same stock as Su.-G. _titt-a_, explained by
Ihre, “Per transennam veluti videre, ut solent curiosi, aut post tegmina
latentes.” V. the authorities quoted, Todd’s Johns. and Wilbr. Gl. [Cf.
Sw. _titta_; Dan. _titte_, to peep; Dan. _tittelege_, to play at
bopeep.]

To-tusede, _part. pa._ entirely rumpled or tumbled, 1948. _See_ Nares,
in v. _Tose_, and _Tousle_, _Toozle_, in Jam., Brockett, &c. Cf. G.
_zausen_.

Toun, _n._ S. town, 1750, &c. _Tun_, 764, 1001, &c. _Tunes_, _pl._ 1444,
2277.

Tour, _n._ Fr. tower, 2073.

Tre, _n._ S. a bar or staff of wood, 1022, 1821, 1843, 1882, &c.
_Dore-tre_, 1806, 1968, bar of the door.

Trewe, _adj._ S. true. 1756.

Tristen, _v._ to trust, 253.

Tro. _See_ Trowe.

Trome, _n._ S. [_truma_] a troop, company, 8.

  Heo makeden heore sceld-_trome_

    _Laȝam._ l. 9454.

  Bisydes stondeth a feondes _trume_,
  And waileth hwenne the saules cume.

    _Les Unze peyne_, &c. MS. Coll. Jes. 29.

The same mode of expression used above occurs lower down, l. 24, “A
stalworþi man in a _flok_,” which is also found in Laȝamon,

  Cador ther wes æc,
  þe kene wes on _flocke_. --l. 23824.

And in _Sir Guy_, H. iii.

  Then came a knight that hight Sadock,
  A doughty man in every _flock_.

Trone, _n._ Lat. throne, 1316.

Trowe, _n._ S. to believe, trust, 1656. _Tro_, 2862. _Trowede_, _pa. t._
believed, 382. Sir Tr. p. 41.

Trusse, _v._ Fr. [_trousser_] to pack up, to truss, 2017. R. Gl. Hence
to _make ready_, K. Alisaund. 7006. Minot, p. 50, which Ritson was
unable to explain.

Tuenti, _num._ S. twenty, 259.

Tumberel, _n._ a porpoise, 757. In Spelm. _Timberellus_ is explained, a
small whale, on the authority of Skene, Vocab. Jur. Scot. L. Forest, _Si
quis cetum_. In Cotgr. also we find “_Tumbe_, the great Sea-Dragon, or
Quadriver; also the Gurnard, called so at Roan.” [But the Sw. _tumlare_,
a porpoise, _lit._ a tumbler, suggests that the name may be given from
its _tumbling_ or _rolling_. The Dan. _tumler_, however, is a dolphin.]

Tun. _See_ Toun.

Turues, _n. pl._ S. turf, peat, 939. Chauc. C. T. 10109. V. Spelm. in v.
and Jennings’ Somersetsh. Gl.

Twel _for_ Twelve, 2455.


Ueneysun, _n._ Fr. venison, 1726.

Vmbestonde, _adv._ S. for a while, formerly, 2297.

  & heo seilede{n} forth,
  þæt inne sæ heo comen,
  þa _vmbe stunde_
  ne sæge heo noht of londe.

    _Laȝam._ l. 11967.

It is equivalent to _umbe-while_ or _vmwhile_, Sc. _umquhile_. _See_
Stunde.

Umbistode, _pa. t._ S. stood around, 1875. _See_ Bistode, Stonden.

Vn-bi-yeden, _pa. t. pl._ S. surrounded, 1842. _See_ Yede.

Vnblithe, _adj._ S. unhappy, 141. Sir Tr. p. 171.

Unbounden, _pa. t. pl._ S. unbound, 601.

Underfong, _pa. t._ S. understood, 115. This sense of the verb is not
found elsewhere. It is in the present poem synonymous with _Understod_
(as Lat. _accipere_, _percipere_).

Understonde, _v._ S. to receive, 2814. _Understod_, _pa. t._ received,
1760. _Understonde_, _pr. subj._ receive, 1159. So in K. Horn, 245, ed.
Rits.

  Horn child thou _vnderstond_,
  Tech him of harpe and song.

where the MS. Laud 108 reads _vnderfonge_. See Lumby’s ed. l. 239.

Unker, _pron. g. c. dual._ S. of you two, 1882.

Vnkeueleden, _pa. t. pl._ S. ungagged, 601. _See_ Keuel.

Unkyndelike, _adv._ S. unsuitably, 1250.

Vnornelike, _adj._ S. basely, or degradingly, 1941. The only word in the
Sax. remaining to which it can be referred, is _unornlic_, tritus, Jos.
9. 5. The following instances also approach the same stock:

  Ne speke y nout with Horne,
  Nis he nout so _vnorne._

    _K. Horn_, 337.

  Mi stefne is bold & noȝt _vnorne_,
  Ho is ilich one grete horne,
  & þin is ilich one pipe.

    _Hule and Niȝtingale_, l. 317.

[Ihre shews that Icel. and Su.-Goth. _orna_ mean to acquire vital heat,
to grow warm. Hence _unorne_ means unfervent, spiritless, feeble, old.
Thus, in the _Hule and Niȝtingale_ it means _feeble_, _weak_; in Jos.
9. 5, it is used of _old, worn-out_ shoes. In the Ormulum, _unnorne_
occurs frequently, in the sense of _poor_, _mean_, _feeble_; see ll.
827, 3668; also _unnornelig_, meaning _meanly_, _humbly_, _obscurely_,
in ll. 3750, 4858, 7525, 8251.]

Unride, _adj._ S. [_ungereod, ungerydu_] It is here used in various
significations, most of which, however, correspond to the senses given
by Somner. Large, cumbersome (of a garment), 964; unwieldy (of the bar
of a door), 1795; deep, wide (of a wound), 1981, 2673; numerous,
extensive (of the nobility), 2947. _Unrideste, sup._ deepest, widest,
1985. In the second sense we find it in Sir Tristr. p. 167,

  Dartes wel _unride_
  Beliagog set gan.

And in _Guy of Warwick_, ap. Ellis, M. R. V. 2, p. 79.

  A targe he had ywrought full well,
  Other metal was ther none but steel,
    A mickle and _unrede_.

In the fourth sense we have these examples:

  Opon Inglond for to were
  With stout ost and _unride_.

    _Horn Childe_, ap. Rits. M. R. V. 3, p. 283.

  Schir Rannald raugh to the renk ane rout wes _unryde_.

    _Sir Gaw. and Gol._ ii. 25.

  The soudan gederet an ost _unryde_.

    _K. of Tars_, 142.

Cf. also _Sir Guy_, Ee. IV. in Garrick’s Collect. ‘Ameraunt drue out a
swerde _unryde_.’ In the sense of huge, or unwieldy, we may also
understand it in Sir Tr. p. 148, 164; Guy of Warw. ap. Ell. M. R. V. 2,
p. 78; Horn Childe, ap. Rits. V. 3, p. 295. In R. Brunne, p. 174, it
expresses loud, tremendous. Sir W. Scott and Hearne are both at fault in
their Glossaries, and even Jamieson has done but little to set them
right, beyond giving the true derivation, and then, under the cognate
word _Unrude_, Doug. Virg. 167, 35, &c., errs from pure love of theory.

Vnrith, _n._ S. injustice, 1369.

Unwrast, Unwraste, _adj._ S. [_unwræste_] feeble, worthless, 2821;
rotten, 547. This word occurs in the Saxon Chron. 168, 4 (ed. Thorpe,
p. 321), applied to a rotten ship, and this appears to have been the
original meaning. The sense in which it was subsequently used may be
learnt by comparing Laȝam. ll. 13943, 29609; R. Gl. p. 586; Chron. of
Engl. 662, 921; Ly Beaus Desc. 2118 (not explained by Rits.);
K. Alisaund. 878; R. Cœur de L. 872, and Sevyn Sages, 1917. It is not
found in Jam. Cf. A.S. _wræst_, firm.

Uoyz, _n._ Lat. voice, 1264.

Vre, _pron._ S. our, 13, 596, &c.

Vt, _prep._ S. out, 89, 155, &c. _Uth_, 346, 1178.

Ut-bidde. _See_ Bidd.

Ut-drawe, Ut-drawen, Vt-drow, Ut-drowen. _See_ Drou.

Uten, _prep._ S. out, exhausted, 842; without, foreign, as in
_Uten-laddes_, 2153, 2580, foreigners.

Ut-lede. _See_ Lede.

Utrage, _n._ S. outrage, 2837.


W. _See_ Hw.

Wa, _n._ S. woe, wail, 465.

Wade, _v._ S. Lat. to pass, go, 2645. _Wede_, 2387, 2641. Vid. Nares.

Wagge, _v._ S. to wield, brandish, 89.

Waiten, Wayte, Wayten, _v._ Fr. to watch, 512, 1754, 2070. Chauc. Cf.
O.Fr. _gaiter_.

Waken, _v._ S. to watch, 630. _Waked_, _part. pa._ watched, kept awake,
2999. _See_ R. Br., Sq. of L. D. 852. Chauc.

Wakne, _v._ S. to wake, awaken, 2164.

Wan, _adv._ S. when, 1962.

War, _adj._ S. aware, wary, 788, 2139.

Warie, _v._ S. to curse, 433. _Waried_, _part. pa._ cursed, 434. Emare,
667. _Wery_, Minot, p. 7. _Warrie_, Chauc. _See_ Gl. Lynds.

Warp, _pa. t._ S. threw, cast, 1061.

  Al swa feor swa a mon
  Mihte _werpe^n_ ænne stan.

    _Laȝam._ l. 17428.

So in Sc. Doug. Virg. 432, and Barb. iii. 642. V. Jam.

Washen, _v._ S. to wash, 1233.

Waste _for_ Was þe, 87.

Wastel, _n._ Fr. cake, or loaf made of finer flour, 878. _Wastels_,
_pl._ 779. _See_ Todd’s Illustr. of Chauc., who derives the name from
_wastell_, the vessel or basket in which the bread was carried. V. Du
Cange, Spelm. Jam. In Pegge’s Form of Cury, p. 72, 159, we meet with
_Wastels yfarced_.

Wat, _pron._ _See_ Hwat.

Wat, _v._ _See_ Quath.

Wat, _pp._ known, 1674. _See_ Wot.

Wawe, _n._ S. wall, 474, 2470. The phrase _bith wawe_, 474, is also
found in Rits. A. S. p. 46, which is left unexplained by the Editor, and
is badly guessed at by Ellis. By the aid of Moor’s Suffolk Gl. we are
enabled to ascertain the meaning of an expression which is not yet
obsolete. “By the walls.” Dead and not buried. “A’ lie bi’ the walls”
--said, I believe, only of a human subject. [This remark only applies to
l. 474. In ll. 1963, 2470, the phrase refers to the benches placed round
the walls in the great hall, whereon men slept at night, and sat in
council by day.] _Wowe_, 1963, 2078. Still so pronounced in Lanc., &c.

Waxen. _See_ Wex.

Wayke, _adj. pl._ S. weak, 1012.

Wayte, Wayten. _See_ Waiten.

We, 115, 287, 392, 772. Apparently an error of the scribe for _wel_, but
its frequent repetition may cause it to be doubted, whether the _l_ may
not have been purposely dropped.

Wede, _v._ _See_ Wade.

Wede, _n._ S. clothing, garments, 94, 323, 861. In very general use
formerly, and still preserved in the phrase, a widow’s _weeds_.

Weddeth _for_ Wedded, 1127.

Wei, Weie, _n._ S. way, road, 772, 952.

Weilawa, Weilawei, _interj._ S. woe! alas! 462, 570. _See_ Gl. Sir Tr.,
Rits. M. R., and Chauc. [A.S. _wá la wá_, woe, lo! woe; now corrupted
into _wellaway_.]

Wel, _adv._ S. full, _passim._ _Wel sixti_, 1747; _wel o-bon_. _See_ On.
_Wel with me_, 2878. _Wol_, 185.

Wel, _n._ S. weal, wealth, prosperity (_for wel ne for wo_), 2777.

Welde, _v._ S. to wield, govern (a kingdom), 129, 175; (a weapon), 1436;
(possessions), 2034. _Weldes_, _pr. t. 2 p._ wieldest, governest, 1359.

Wende, _v._ S. to go, 1346, 1705, 2629. _Wenden_, _pr. t. pl. subj._
1344. _Wende_, _pr. t. pl. 2 p._ go, 1440. _Wend_, _part. pa._ turned,
2138.

Wene, _v._ S. _pres. sing_, ween, think, 655, 840, 1260, &c. _Wenes_,
_pr. t. 2 p._ thinkest, 598. _Wenestu_, 1787, thinkest thou. _Wend_,
_Wende_, _pa. t._ thought, 374, 524, 1091, 1803, &c. _Wenden_, _pa. t.
pl._ 1197, 2547.

Wepen, _pr. t._ or _pa. t. pl._ S. weep, wept, 401.

Wepne, _n._ S. weapon, 89, 490, 1436, &c.

Wer _for_ Were, 1097.

Werd, _n._ S. world, 1290, 2241, 2335, 2792, 2968. _O worde_, in the
world, 1349. Cf. _Ward_ = world, in _Lancelot of the Laik_, and _Gen.
and Exod._ ed. Morris, ll. 280, 591.

Were, _v._ S. [_werian_] to defend, 2152, 2298. Sir Tr. p. 156; Yw. and
Gaw. 2578; Horn Childe, ap. Rits. M. R., V. 3, p. 289; K. of Tars, 189;
Chauc. C. T. 2552, V. Note, p. 182. _Werie_, K. Horn, ed. Lumby, 785,
Web., Minot, Gl. Lynds.

Were, should be, 2782. _Weren_, _3 p. pl._ were, 156, &c.

Weren, 784. Sir F. Madden says--Garnett conjectured _weirs_ or dams,
from Isl. _ver_. [If _weren_ be really a plural noun, I should prefer to
translate it by _pools_; cf. A.S. _wær_, Icel. _ver_, Su.-Go. _wär_.
Ihre says-- “_Wär_, locus, ubi congregari amant pisces, ut solent inter
brevia et vada. Isl. _ver_, _fiskaver_. A.S. id. unde _ver-hurde_ apud
Bens. custos septi piscatorii, Angl. _wier_, _wear_, &c.” See _wer_ in
Stratmann. In this case the line means-- “in the sea-pools he often set
them,” and the note on the line (q.v.) is wrong.]

Werewed, _part. pa._ S. worried, killed, 1915. [We should probably
insert a mark of interrogation, thus-- “Hwat dide he? þore were{n} he
werewed,” i.e. “What did they effect? There were they slain.” Spelt
_wirwed_, 1921. Cf. Du. _worgen_, and see Jam. s.v. _Wery_, and _Worry_
in Atkinson’s Gl. of Cleveland dialect.]

Werne, v. S. to refuse, deny, 1345. _Werne_, _pr. t. 3 p. s. subj._
refuses, forbids, 926. Sir Tr. p. 88; K. Horn, 1420, &c.

Wesseyl, _n._ S. wassail, 1246.

Wesseylen, _pr. t. pl._ wassail, 2098. _Wosseyled_, _part. pa._ 1737.
_See_ Rits. A. S. Diss. p. xxxiii. n. Hearne’s Gl. to R. Glouc. in v.
_Queme and Wasseyl_, Selden’s Notes on Drayton’s Polyolb. p. 150, and
Nares.

Wex, _pa. t._ S. waxed, grew, 281. _Waxen_, _part. pa._ grown, 302, 791.

Wicke, Wike, Wikke, _adj._ S. wicked, vile, 66, 319, 425, 665, 688, &c.
_Swithe wicke_, 965, very mean. _Swiþe wikke cloþes_, 2458, very mean
clothing. _Wicke wede_, 2825, mean clothing.

Wicth, With, _n._ S. [_wiht_] whit, bit, small part, 97, 1763, 2500.
Laȝam. l. 15031; Sevyn Sages, 293. ‘The loue of hire ne lesteth no
_wyht_ longe,’ MS. Harl. 2253, f. 128.

Wicth, With, _adj._ courageous, stout, active, 344, 1008, 1064, 1651,
1692, &c. _Wicteste_, _sup._ 9. An epithet used universally by the
ancient poets, and to be found in every Gloss. merely differing in
orthography, as spelt _Waite_, _Wate_, _Wight_, _Wich_ &c. [Sir F.
Madden suggests a derivation from A.S. _hwæt_ (Icel. _hvátr_), acute,
brave. Wedgwood suggests Sw. _vig_, nimble. Cf. Su.-Goth. _wig_, Icel.
_vigr_, fit for _war_ (A.S. _wig_).]

Wider, _adv._ S. whither, where, 1139.

Widuen, Wydues, _n. pl._ S. widows, 33, 79.

Wif, _n._ S. wife, 2860; woman, 1713. _Wiues_, _pl._ 2855.

Wike, Wikke. _See_ Wicke.

Wil, _adv._ S. while, 6.

Wil, _adj._ lost in error, uncertain how to proceed, 863; at a loss,
without experience, 1042. Wynt. vi. 13, 115. V. Jam. who derives it from
Su.-G. _wild_, Isl. _villr_. It is radically the same with _wild_.

Wile, will, 352, 485, &c. _Wilte_, 528, 1135, wilt thou; _Wiltu_, 681,
905. _Wilen_, _pl._ 732, 920, 1345, 2817, &c.

Wille, _n._ S. will, 528.

Wimman, _n._ S. woman, 1139, 1168, &c. _Wman_, 281. _Wymman_, 1156.

Win, _n._ S. wine, 1729. _Wyn_, 2341.

Winan, _v._ S. to get to, arrive at, 174. V. Gl. to _Will. of Palerne_.

Winne, _n._ S. joy, gain, 660, 2965. _Muchere winne_, Laȝam. l. 10233.
Horn Childe, ap. Rits. M. R., V. 3, p. 294.

Wirchen, _v._ S. to work, cause, 510.

Wirwed. _See_ Werewed.

Wis, _adj._ S. wise, prudent, 180, 1421, 1635; skilled, 282.

Wislike, _adv._ S. wisely, 274.

Wisse, _v._ S. to direct, ordain, advice, 104, 361. Sir Tr. p. 29;
K. Horn, Chron. of Engl. 499; Chauc., Gl. Lynds.

Wissing, _n._ S. advice, or conduct, 2902.

Wiste, _pa. t._ S. knew, 115, 358, 541, &c. _Wisten_, _pa. t. pl._ 1184,
1187, 1200, &c.

Wit, _prep._ S. with, 52, 505, 701, 905, 1090, 2517, &c.; by, 2489.
_Wituten_, 179, 247, 2860, without. _Withuten_, 425, except. _With
than_, provided that, 532. _With that_, 1220.

Wite, _v._ S. [_wítan_, decernere] _pres. subj. or imp._ decree, ordain,
19, 1316.

Wite, _v._ S. _pres. subj. or imp._ preserve, guard, defend, 405, 559.
R. Gl. p. 98, 102. So in the _Carmen inter Corpus & Animam_, MS. Digb.
86.

  The king that al this world shop thoru his holi miȝtte,
  He _wite_ houre soule from then heuele wiȝtte.

And in the French Romance of Kyng Horn, MS. Harl. 527, f. 72, b. c. 2.

  Ben iurez _Wite God_, kant auerez beu tant,
  Kant le vin uus eschaufe, si seez si iurant.

Wite, Witen, _v._ S. [_witan_, cognoscere] to know, 367, 625, 2201,
2786; to recollect, 2708. _Wite_, _pr. t. pl. 2 p._ know, 2808; _imp. 3
p. wite_, know, 517. _Wite_, _3 p. s. subj._ (if) he know, 694. _Witen_,
_pr. t. pl. 2 p._ know, 2208. _See_ Wot.

With, _conj._ _See_ Wit.

With, _n._ _See_ Wicth.

With, _adj._ _See_ Wicth.

With, _adj._ S. white, 48, 1144.

With-sitten, _v._ S. to oppose, 1683. R. Br., Web.

Wlf, _n._ S. wolf, 573.

Wluine, _n._ S. she-wolf, 573. Dan. _ulfinde_, a she-wolf.

Wman. _See_ Wimman.

Wnden, _part. pa._ S. wound, 546.

Wo, _pron._ S. who, whoso, 76, 79, &c. _See_ Hwo.

Wo, _n._ S. woe, sorrow, 510, &c.

Wod, _adj._ S. mad, 508, 1777, 1848, &c. _Wode_, _pl._ 1896, 2361.

Wok, _pa. t._ S. awoke, 2093.

Wol. _See_ Wel.

Wole, will, 1150. _Wolde_, _would_, 354, 367, &c. _Wode_, 951, 2310.
_Wolden_, _pl._ 456, 514, 1057.

Wombes, _n. pl._ S. bellies, 1911.

Wom so, _pron._ S. whomso, 197.

Won, Wone, great number, plenty, in phr. _ful god won_, in great
quantity (_in_ 1791 _it seems to mean_ with great force), 1024, 1791,
1837, 1907, 2325, 2617, 2729. R. Gl., Horn Childe, ap. Rits. M. R.,
V. 3, p. 308, 314; R. Cœur de L. 3747; K. Alisaund, 1468; K. of Tars,
635; Minot, p. 14; Chauc. _Wane_, Yw. and Gaw. 1429; _Wayn_, Wall. viii.
947. Cf. Gl. to _Will. of Palerne_.

Wone, _n._ S. (probably the same as _ween_, Sir Tr. p. 59, 78), opinion,
conjecture, 1711, 1972. Cf. l. 816, and the Glossaries, in v. _Wene_.

Wone, _v._ S. to dwell, 247, 406. _Woneth_, _pr. t. 3 p._ dwelleth, 105.

Wone, _part. pa._ wont, 2151, 2297. K. Horn, 36; R. Gl. Chron. of Engl.
632; Web., Chauc. [A.S. _wune_, a custom.]

Wonges, _n. pl._ S. fields, plains, 397, 1444. Cf. l. 1360. Spelman
thinks arable land is meant by the term, rather than pasture.

Wore, _2 and 3 p. s._ were, 504, 684, &c. _Wore_, _Woren_, _pl._ 237,
448, &c. It is not merely a licentious spelling, as conjectured by Sir
W. Scott.

Worþe, _v._ S. _imp._ may he be, 1102, 2873. _Wrth_, 434. _Wurþe_, 2221.
Laȝam. l. 28333. Sir Tr. p. 49, and all the Gloss., including Lynds.

Wosseyled. _See_ Wesseylen.

Wot, Woth, _pr. t. 1 p._ S. know, 119, 213, 653, 1345, &c. _Wost_, _pr.
t. 2 p._ knowest, 527, 582, 1384, &c. _Woth_, _pr. t. 3 p._ knows, 2527.
_Wot_, _pl. 1 p._ know, 2803. _Wat_, _part. pa._ known, 1674.

Wowe. _See_ Wawe.

Wrathe, _n._ S. wrath, anger, 2719, 2977. _See_ Wroth.

Wreieres, _n. pl._ S. betrayers, spoilers, 39.

  The _wraiers_ that weren in halle,
  Schamly were thai schende.

    _Sir Tristr._ p. 190.

Wreken, _v._ S. to avenge, revenge, 327, 1901. _Wreke_, _imp._ revenge
(thou), 1363. _Wreken_ (_miswritten for_ wreke), _3 p. imp._ 544.
_Wreke_, _pr. pl. subj._ 1884. _Wreke_, _Wreken_, _part. pa._ revenged,
2368, 2849, 2992. Sir Tr. p. 190, &c.

Wringen, _v._ S. to wring, 1233.

Writ, _n._ S. writing, 2486. _Writes_, _pl._ writs, letters, 136, 2275.
_See_ note to l. 136.

Wrobberes, _n. pl._ S. robbers, 39.

Wros, _n. pl._ corners, 68. So in the _Leg. of S. Margrete_, quoted by
Dr Leyden:

  Sche seiȝe a wel fouler thing
  Sitten in a _wro_;

which Jamieson aptly derives from the Su.-G. _wraa_, angulus. Cf. Dan.
_vraa_, a nook, corner.

Wroth, _adj._ S. wrath, angry, 1117. _Wroþe_, 2973. _See_ Wrathe.

Wrouht, _pa. t._ S. wrought, 2810. _Wrouth_, 1352. _Wrowht_, 2453.

Wrth. _See_ Worthe.

Wunde, _n._ S. wound, 1980, 2673, &c. _Wounde_, 1978. _Wundes_, _pl._
1845, 1898, 1986. _Woundes_, 1977, &c.

Wurþe. _See_ Worþe.


Y, _pron._ I. _See_ Ich.

Ya, _adv._ S. yea, yes, 1888, 2009, 2607. _Ye_, 2606. _See_ Rits. note
to Yw. and Gaw. l. 43. In l. 2009, we should probably have found _yis_
in a more southern work. See the note to _ȝis_ in Gl. to _Will. of
Palerne_. The distinction between _no_ (l. 1800) and _nay_ (l. 1136) is
rightly made.

Yaf. _See_ Yeue.

Yare, _adj._ S. ready, 1391, 2788, 2954. Sir Tr. p. 28; Rits. M. R.,
Web., Chauc., Gl. Lynds.

Yaren, _v._ S. to make ready, 1350. This word in all the Gloss. has the
form of _Yarken_.

Yede, _pa. t._ S. went, 6, 774, 821, &c. _Yeden_, _pa. t. pl._ 889, 952.

Yeft. _See_ Giue.

Yelde, _v._ S. to yield, 2712; _imp. 3 p._ requite, 803. Very common
formerly in this sense. _Yeld_, _imp._ yield (thou), 2717.

Yeme, _v._ S. to take charge of, govern, 131, 172, 182, 324, &c.
_Yemede_, _pa. t._ governed, 975, 2276. Sir Tr. p. 115, Rits. M. R.,
Web., R. Gl., Chauc.

Yen. _See_ Agen.

Yerne, _adv._ S. eagerly, anxiously, 153, 211, 880, 925. Web., Rits.
M. R., Chauc.

Yerne, _v._ S. to desire earnestly, 299. Laȝam. l. 4427. K. Horn, 1419;
R. Br., Chauc., Gl. Lynds.

Yete, _adv._ S. yet, 495, 973, 996, 1043.

Yeue, _v._ S. to give, 298, &c. _Yeueth_, _pr. t. 3 p._ giveth, 459.
_Yif_, _imp._ give (thou), 674; _3 p._ _yeue_, 22; _pl._ _yeueþ_, 911.
_Yaf_, _pa. t._ gave, _or_ gave heed, 315, 419, &c. _Gaf_, 218, 418,
1311, &c. _Gouen_, _pa. t. pl._ 164 (in phr. _gouen hem ille_, gave
themselves up to grief); Sir Tr. p. 129. _Giue_, _part. pa._ 2488;
_gouen_, 220. _Youenet_ = _Youen it_, given it, 1643. For _yaf_ in
l. 1174, see note on the line.

Y-here. _See_ Here, _v._

Yif, _prep._ S. if, 126, 377, 1974, &c. _Yf_, 1189.

Yif. _See_ Yeue.

Y-lere. _See_ Lere.

Ynow. _See_ Inow.

Youenet. _See_ Yeue.

Ys. _See_ note to l. 1174.

Yuel, Yuele. _See_ Iuele.

Yunge, _adj._ S. young, 368, &c.

Yure, _pron._ S. your, 171.




INDEX OF NAMES TO “HAUELOK.”

  [Transcriber’s Note:
  The following bracketed paragraph is in the original. This e-text
  does not include page numbers, but listed names can easily be found
  by a text search. For line references, note that printed line numbers
  go by multiples of 4.]

[In this Index, the references under words in large capitals are in
general to the _pages_ of the book; otherwise, the references are to the
_lines_ of the poem.]


  ATHELWOLD (_spelt_ Aþelwald, l. 1077), is king of England, and
  governs wisely, pp. 2, 3;
    feels he is dying, p. 4;
    bequeaths his daughter to the care of Godrich, pp. 6, 7;
    dies, p. 8.
    (Mentioned again in ll. 2709, 2803.)

  Auelok, _another spelling of_ Hauelok, 1395, 1793.


  BERNARD BRUN (i.e. Bernard Brown; so called in ll. 1751, 1945),
    provides a supper for Havelok, p. 48;
    his house attacked by thieves, p. 49;
    fights against them, p. 52;
    tells Ubbe how well Havelok fought, p. 54.

  BERTRAM (_named_ in l. 2898),
    is cook to the Earl of Cornwall, and employs Havelok, pp. 27, 28;
    is made Earl of Cornwall, and marries Levive, Grim’s daughter,
      p. 83.

  BIRKABEYN (spelt Bircabein, l. 494);
    _gen._ Birkabeynes, 2150, 2209, 2296,
    is king of Denmark, p. 11;
    commends his three children to Godard, p. 12;
    dies, p. 13;
    his son Havelok’s resemblance to him, p. 60.


  Cestre (Chester), 2607, 2859, 2896.

  Cornwayle (Cornwall), 178, 2908;
    Cornwalie, 884.

  Crist, 16, &c.;
    --krist, 22;
    _gen._ kristes, 2797.


  Dauy, seint, 2863.

  Denemark (Denmark), 340, 381, 386, &c.

  Denshe, _sing. adj._ Danish, 1403;
    _pl._ 2575, 2693, 2938.
    Danshe, 2689.

  Douere (Dover), 139, 265.
    Doure, 320.


  Engelond (England), 59, 202, 250, &c.;
    --Engellond, 1093;
    --Engelonde, 208;
    --Englond, 1270;
    --Engeland, 108, 610;
    --Hengelond, 999;
    _gen._ Engelondes, 63.

  Englishe, _pl. adj._ (_followed by_ men), 2766, 2795;
    --Englis (_used absolutely_), 254;
    --Henglishe, 2945.


  Giffin [_Qu._ Griffin] Galle, 2029.

  GODARD (_gen._ Godardes, l. 2415),
    is made regent of Denmark, pp. 12, 13;
    shuts up Birkabeyn’s children in a castle, p. 13;
    kills Swanborow and Helfled, p. 15;
    spares Havelok, p. 16;
    but afterwards hires Grim to drown Havelok, p. 17;
    is attacked by Havelok, p. 67;
    is taken prisoner, p. 68;
    condemned, flayed, drawn, and hung, pp. 70, 71.

  GODRICH (_spelt_ Godrigh, l. 178),
    is Earl of Cornwall, p. 6;
    is made regent of England, pp. 7, 8, 9;
    shuts Goldborough up in Dover castle, p. 10;
    makes Goldborough marry Havelok, p. 33;
    raises an army against Havelok, p. 72;
    excites his men, p. 73;
    marches to Grimsby, p. 74;
    fights with Ubbe, p. 75;
    fights with Havelok, pp. 77, 78;
    is taken prisoner, p. 78;
    taken to Lincoln, and burnt alive, pp. 80, 81.

  GOLDEBORU (_or_ Goldeborw, l. 2985),
    is daughter of King Athelwold, p. 4;
    is committed to the care of Godrich, pp. 8, 9;
    shut up in Dover castle, p. 11;
    is sent for to Lincoln, p. 33;
    is married to Havelok, p. 36;
    hears an angel’s voice, p. 39;
    encourages Havelok to go to Denmark, p. 41;
    rejoices at Godrich’s death, p. 81;
    is queen of England, p. 85.
    _See_ Havelok.

  GRIM, a fisher, is hired by Godard to drown Havelok, p. 17;
    discovers Havelok to be the right heir to the crown, p. 19;
    takes Havelok over to England, p. 20;
    founds Grimsby, p. 23;
    sends Havelok to Lincoln, p. 26;
    dies, p. 37.
    [In l. 2333, there seems to be an allusion to a spectacle, in which
    the history of Grim is represented.]

  Grimes, _gen. c. of_ Grim, 1343, 1392, 2867.

  Grimesbi, 745, 2540, 2579, 2617, 2619;
    --Grimesby, 1202.

  Gunnild (daughter of Grim, marries Earl Reyner of Chester),
      2866, 2896.

  Gunter (an English earl), 2606.


  HAUELOK, son of king Birkabeyn of Denmark, p. 13;
    spared by Godard, p. 16;
    but given over by him to Grim to be drowned, p. 17;
    spared and fed by Grim, p. 20;
    goes to England, p. 22;
    sells fish, p. 25;
    works as a porter, p. 27;
    puts the stone, p. 31;
    marries Goldborough, p. 35;
    returns to Grimsby, p. 36;
    his dream, p. 39;
    returns to Denmark, p. 43;
    trades there, p. 44;
    is noticed by Ubbe, p. 45;
    defends Bernard’s house against thieves, pp. 48-53;
    is known to be heir of Denmark by a miraculous light, p. 60;
    is dubbed knight by Ubbe, p. 65;
    is king of Denmark, p. 66;
    defeats Godard, p. 68;
    invades England, p. 72;
    defeats Godrich, p. 77;
    rewards Bertram and others, p. 82;
    lives to be a hundred years old, p. 83;
    is crowned king of England at London, p. 84;
    is king for sixty years, p. 85.
    [The story is called “þe gest of Hauelok and of Goldeborw,”
    l. 2985.]

  Helfled (Havelok’s sister), 411.

  Hengelonde (England), 999.

  Henglishe (_pl._ English), 2945.

  Humber (the river), 733.

  Huwe Rauen (one of Grim’s sons), 1398, 1868, 2349, 2636, 2677;
    _spelt_ Hwe, 1878.


  Iohan, seint; the patron saint to whom Havelok commits his Danes,
      2957;
    bi seint Iohan! 1112, 2563.
    _Spelt_ Ion, 177.

  Iudas, 319, 425, 1133.


  Lazarun (= Lazarum, _acc._ of Lazarus), 331.
    Cf. “Lord”--said Guy--“that reared _Lazaroun_,” &c.
    Guy of Warwick, in Ellis, Met. Rom. (ed. Halliwell), p. 227.

  Leue (Grim’s wife), 558, 576, 595, 642.

  Leuiue (Grim’s daughter, married to Bertram), 2914.

  Lincolne, 773, 847, 862, 980, 1105, 2558, 2572, 2824.

  Lindeseye (N. part of Lincolnshire), 734.

  Lundone (London), 2943.


  Marz (March), 2559.


  Reyner (earl of Chester), 2607.

  Roberd þe rede (Grim’s eldest son), 1397, 1686, 1888, &c.;
    --Robert, 2405, 2411, &c.;
    _gen._ Roberdes, 1691.

  Rokesborw (explained by Prof. Morley to mean Rokeby, but it is surely
  Roxburgh), 265;
    --Rokesburw, 139.
    Roxburgh is spelt _Rokesburgh_ in Walsingham, ed. Riley, i. 340, &c.


  Sathanas (Satan), 1100, 1134, 2512.

  Swanborow (Havelok’s sister), 411.


  UBBE, a great Danish lord, p. 44;
    entertains Havelok, p. 45;
    takes him to his castle, p. 57;
    does homage to Havelok, p. 63;
    dubs him knight, p. 65;
    his combat with Godrich, p. 75;
    is sorely wounded, p. 76.


  Willam Wendut (one of Grim’s sons), 1690, 1881, 1892, 2348, 2632;
    --Wiliam Wenduth, 1398.

  Winchestre, 158, 318.


  Yerk (York), 1178.

  Ynde, India, 1085.




JOHN CHILDS AND SON, PRINTERS.


       *       *       *       *       *
           *       *       *       *


ERRORS AND INCONSISTENCIES:

_Multiple Texts:_

This book exists in at least two forms, distinguished by minor
differences in the modern (1868) material. The title page(s),
verso and introduction give no hint that there were any changes or
additions; references to the “former” and “present” edition are to
Madden alone (Roxburghe, 1828) contrasted with Skeat (EETS, 1868). For
convenience the two 1868 variants will be called “preliminary” and
“final”. The 1975 reprint used the “final” version.

Anglo-Saxon diphthongs are written as eá, eó with stress on second
vowel. The form “hung” (with the meaning “hanged”) is used consistently.


_Preface:_

  § 7:
  ‘Apres ceo vient  [_open quote invisible_]
  § 9:
  Seuene an tuenti fulle ȝer.’ / MS. Reg. 12. C. xii.
    [_close quote printed after MS name_]
  § 13:
  (the Latin text, viz. MSS. Harl. 655, Cott. Jul. E. 8, Reg. 13 E. 1)
    [_close parenthesis missing_]
  § 18:
  In his MSS. collections  [“In his...]
  he proceeds: / “that Hauelocke did sometymes
    [_in the original, the quoted passage begins at mid-paragraph
    in smaller type_]
  § 22:
  his five children are yet alive  [_inconsistent tense in original_]
  § 27:
  _Nouns._ ... _bleikè_
    [_è conjectural: printed text unclear_]
  § 28:
  Here the syllables _-nes and_ in l. 3, _of a_ in l. 4, and _it wile_
  in l. 5  [_printed as shown: errors for ll. 2, 3, 4_]
  [Footnote 41]
  _sawe_, _wowe_; _beþe_, _rede_; _knaue_, _plawe_; _sawe_, _hawe_
    [_printed commas changed to semicolons for consistency_]
  [Footnote 43]
  1083, 1289, 1685, 2431  [_comma after 1289 invisible_]
  § 29
  [Section C.1]
  ... various grammatical inflexions:--
    [_paragraph break added by transcriber_]
  [Section 3.d]
  Observe hated = hated_e_, 40.  [_final . missing_]
  þinë cherlës, þinë hinë, 620;  [_printed . for ;_]
  each foot has _two_ or _three_ syllables in it  [sylalbles]

_Emendations:_

  p. 20, l. 640. For _ney_ ...  [_text has 60 for 640_]

  p. 24, l. 784. Perhaps we should, however, read _se-weren_, and the
  note on the line (p. 93) may be wrong. See _Weren_ in the Glossary.
    [_The preliminary version of the Emendations reads:_
    ... Perhaps there should be no stop in the line, and ...
    _There are no differences in the body text or Note._]

  Also, _Greting_ is wrongly placed before _Gres_.
    [_This and the remainder of the Emendations-- _Hal_, _Shoten_
    (_Schoten_), _Teyte_, _Bise_-- are missing from the preliminary
    version._]

_HAVELOK:_

  [_sidenote line numbers refer to their location in the e-text_]

  [307 sidenote]
  My son shall have England.”  [_close quote missing_]
  [452 sidenote]
  [Fol. 206b, col. 1.]  [col 1.]
  [1377]
  Þat ihc haue ther-offe douthe and kare,  [_see Glossary_]
  [2897 sidenote]
  Havelok remembers Bertram, the earl’s cook,
    [_comma after “cook” missing_]

_Notes:_

  31. ... Pinkerton’s Scotish Poems Reprinted  [_not an error_]
  939. ... “a coarse reedy shrub--like ours perhaps”
    [_i.e. the kind we have in Suffolk (quoting Moor)_]
  --. Isl. _staer_  [_unchanged: error for “stær”?_]
  1838. ... Dogges, that wolden him to-tere.
    [_text has superfluous closing bracket at end of line_]
  2927. _Hire that was ful swete in bedde._]
    [_mismatched closing bracket in original_]

_Glossary:_

  [_A number of Glossary entries are missing the part of speech,
  usually _n._ They have not been individually noted._]

  [Abbreviations]
  Su. G. Suio-Gothic.
    [_unchanged: Glossary always hyphenates “Su.-G.” or “Su.-Goth.”_]

  Al, _adv._ S. wholly, entirely, 34, 70, 139, 203, &c.
  Al, _adj._ S. all, 203, 264, &c.
    [_entries unchanged: “al” occurs only once in 203_]
  Als, Also, Also
    [_unchanged: error for two words “Al so”?_]
  And, _conj._ if, 2862.  [_“if” italicized_]
  Aute, Awcte  [_alphabetization may be intentional_]
  Bise ...  [_line number added from Emendations (final version only)_]
  Datheit, _interj._ ... [from the O.F. _hait_, pleasure].
    [_In the preliminary version, the bracketed addition reads
    “possibly from _haïr_, to hate”._]
  Dunten, _pa. t. pl._ S. struck, beat, 2448.  [_see Emendations_]
  Greting, _n._ S. weeping, 166.
    [_see Emendations (final version only)_]
  Hal ...
    [_bracketed text added from Emendations (final version only)_]
  Halue ... _See_ Bi-halue.
    [_cross-referenced entry is one word “Bihalue”_]
  Hul, _n._ S. hollow, i.e. vale, 2687.  [_. after 2687 invisible_]
  Hwil-gat ... _Howgates_, Skinner.  [_final . missing_]
  Keft ... _See_ Sure _and_ Coupe.
    [_no Glossary entry for “Sure” or similar_]
  Ladde, _n._ S. lad, 1786.  [_period after 1786 missing_]
  Lene ... _Yw. and Gaw._ 737.  [_final . missing_]
  Liue ... _See_ On-liue.
    [_entry is two words “On liue” under “On”_]
  Loken ...  [_bracketed text added from Emendations_]
  Offrende, Dan. Fr. offering, 1386.  [_final . missing_]
  Pastees ... Al of _pasteiis_ beth the walles.
    [_The preliminary version has the apparent error “_pasteüs_”._]
  Pyment, _n._ B.L.  [_unchanged: usual form is “B. Lat.”_]
  Rathe, _v._ S. [_rædan_] to advise  [_text has “raedan”_]
  Schoten, Shoten ...
    [_bracketed text added from Emendations (final version only)_]
  Seken ... Sire, we ben knizttes fer i-fare
    [_unchanged: z error for ȝ?_]
  Shamelike ... Sir Tr. p. 93.  [_final . missing_]
  Spille ... _Of limes spille_  [_quoted “Of” not italicized_]
  Teyte ...
    [_second (shorter) bracketed section added from Emendations
    (final version only)_]
  Umbistode ... _See_ Bistode, Stonden.
    [_no Glossary entry for “Bistode” or similar_]
  Weren ...
    [_The preliminary version is printed without brackets but is
    otherwise identical._]
  Wrathe ... _See_ Wroth.  [_final . missing_]

_Index of Names:_

  BIRKABEYN (spelt Bircabein, l. 494);
  _gen._ Birkabeynes, 2150, 2209, 2296,
    [_closing parenthesis printed after 2296 in second line_]






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Lay of Havelok the Dane, by Unknown

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE LAY OF HAVELOK THE DANE ***

***** This file should be named 32049-0.txt or 32049-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/2/0/4/32049/

Produced by Louise Hope, Taavi Kalju and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
book was produced from scanned images of public domain
material from the Google Print project.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
